
Lecture 01, 28 October 1986: Introduction: Pleats and Folds 
Part 1
Good, so we’re off. [Pause, room noises] This year, I am proposing the following topic: Leibniz as Baroque philosopher. So you will see if you will continue to come. Those who do continue to come, I am asking of them an assignment… Well, it’s not even an assignment. It’s a way of following the reading from anything written by Leibniz, whatever you like. It’s fine if you don’t know what [to choose]; I am proposing one or the other from two very short works – Leibniz wrote a lot of small works – either the Monadology, quite small, you see? But I have a small edition; one from any publisher is fine. [Deleuze looks at one student’s edition] In one year, that’s readable, [Laughter] the Monadology, or else [try] something a bit larger, but not much, the Discourse on Metaphysics. There’s an edition from the Presses… no, from Vrin, I think, but no matter, one that includes both of them, for those of you who would like to read them both. But I especially emphasize that you might read other things.
So today, I am again speaking as a function of those who will continue to come; if there are some among you who have the slightest mathematical background, read any of Leibniz’s works in mathematics. If there are some among you who have a musical background, you will see as we go forward how musical questions are very, very deeply inscribed in Leibniz’s system. Fine, so we will see all that.
This course is abstractly or ideally divided in two parts, the first part being addressed to [students in] the first cycle [undergraduate level] and the second part to [students in] the second and third cycles [graduate level], but the line of separation is ideal, although completely useful and administrative. The separation will be indicated maybe by a recess, [Laughter] maybe by a light show. So let’s continue.
But I would like to know who arrived here first today. Can you tell me? Was the room open or not? [Different answers, “we opened it”]
Claire Parnet: We asked that it be opened from a guy from cleaning who refused to do so because, he said, the class didn’t start until nine AM…
Deleuze: Aha, that’s it, that’s it.
Parnet: … and clearly, he had orders not to open it.
Deleuze: And how did you persuade him? [Laughter] No, that’s fine, that’s fine, because let me tell you. In this university, if you’ve never heard of this, there is an entirely strange procedure that has been imposed through which, when I arrive, I am supposed to go see the guard; I give the guard my little token and he gives me the room key and keeps the token. Afterward, I have to close the room and bring back the key, and he will return my token to me. So I was worried… It’s really grotesque and twisted as a solution. And do you know why? It’s because we have to prevent students from taking chairs into the other classrooms. So, I was surprised that the room was open, but I understand. You have to keep doing this every time. [Laughter]
[A student responds]: And we have to put the room in order as well, because when we get here, the chairs are never like this [in order]. The first ones to arrive, Michel and a few others, it’s [inaudible] . . .  and it’s been like this for years!
Deleuze: Ah for years? [Laughter] That’s not right. That really shouldn’t be … Ok, let’s go.
So, why this subject? I wanted to do “What is philosophy?”, and then I couldn’t. It’s such a sacred subject, “What is philosophy?,” that I didn’t dare to take it on. But this is nearly an introduction to “What is philosophy?”. Why? Leibniz’s life is rather simple: 1648-1718. I tell you that because this is all I have to say about his life. It’s just so you can situate yourself. So he is born nearly halfway through the seventeenth century and dies well into the eighteenth century. For any complementary information on his life, which is nonetheless quite interesting, you can refer to the usual introductions.
What can we say about the tumultuous arrival of Leibniz into philosophy? We can say summarily that it’s the entry of German philosophy, that it’s the arrival of German philosophy. It’s the entry of German philosophy into Europe, but how does it distinguish itself, this entry of German philosophy into Europe? It distinguishes itself through the arrival of the system. It’s with Leibniz that the word “system” is going to designate the entirety of philosophy, or the entirety of a philosophy, Leibniz’s. Before this, “system” was used in astronomy in the sense of world system; it was used in biology, in natural history, in the sense of the system of nature, but it did not designate philosophy as such, so that for this will raise an important question: to understand what Leibniz means by “system” and how it can be identified with philosophy as such.
Fine. Would the “system” be the Baroque form of philosophy? We are told that such a word can be used only with many kinds of precaution, and that the very word “Baroque” raises more problems than it offers solutions. We are told that one would have to know if it’s an aesthetic category or if it’s an historical period. We are told that one would have to know what the exact relation is of “Baroque” with “Renaissance”, with “Classicism,” with “Gothic”, etc. We are told that one would have to know what [would be] the location, what era and location, a Spanish Baroque, and central European Baroque. We are told thousands of things that… We are even told [about] the term “Baroque”, if it’s used rigorously, what it’s suited for, perhaps for architecture, certain aspects of architecture, in a particular location, in a particular era. But can we speak of a Baroque literature, a Baroque music? We are presented all kinds of difficulties from the start.
I am saying that these aren’t problems for us. I would just ask for us one small thing: to have a vague, or even a confused, idea about what “Baroque” might be called, a very, very simple idea that we can consider as an hypothesis, and then we would look for the consequences of this hypothesis. We would develop the hypothesis, and then we would see if that works. We would need to have a functional hypothesis, I mean, not defining an essence of the Baroque, but defining something that the Baroque would be presumed to create, an operation. I believe we would get out of all these problems that would wear us out from the start, that is, what does the word “Baroque” mean? Does it refer to this or to that? Under what conditions might it be usefully used? If we have an operating hypothesis, what constitutes a Baroque man? And my hypothesis is very simple, but on the condition that this operation coincides neither with an operation that might be called Renaissance, nor one that might be called Classical, nor one that might be called Romantic, etc. On the operating level, we have to look for a certain specificity of the Baroque.
If I am formulating a very general hypothesis, I already have the answer. I am not questioning myself about the location in which the Baroque did this or that, a musical essence, an architectural essence, a literary essence. I am saying a very simple thing: the Baroque creates folds, the Baroque creates folds. It’s a hypothesis. The fold is therefore the essential characteristic of the Baroque understood as an operating action. For me, for those who were here last year, this assures me as being the entirely natural transition from last year. We were speaking frequently about the fold, but from another viewpoint. For this year, we find ourselves faced with the necessity, perhaps, the necessity of confirming, of trying to construct a concept of the fold, which as concept, obviously, if all goes well, must follow all the sinuosity of Leibniz’s philosophy. In fact, if this philosophy is under the sign of the fold, it is normal that I speak of a sinuous philosophy.
What does all that mean, that the Baroque is what creates folds? I cannot yet know. I am saying [that] the Baroque is located where matter does not cease being pleated, being pleated onto itself, or where the soul does not cease being folded, the pleats of matter (les replis de la matière) and the folds of the soul (les plis de l’âme).[2] If I am saying the soul folds into itself, that matter pleats onto itself, sense at least [that] I don’t know if this is Baroque, but I know that it’s not about anything of interest to a Classic, nor is it about anything of interest to a Romantic. We are going forward by intuition. It’s not that I would already like to tell you something; what I do want to say, directly to your heart, [is] the pleats of matter and the folds of the soul and to tell you, yes indeed, someone who says this or does that, who folds the soul or pleats the body, well yes, that’s someone Baroque. I don’t at all know why yet, or how. It’s not easy to fold one’s soul, meaning that today and perhaps the next time again, we will proceed through a simple introduction, on this subject of “Leibniz as Baroque philosopher.” Notably, we are going forward with a group an aggregate of guideposts around the themes “pleats of matter” and “the folds of the soul”, so that in today’s session, we could place it under the sign of paragraph 61 in the Monadology, where in this paragraph from the Monadology, it ends in a truly splendid way: “[A soul] could never bring out all at once everything that is folded into it because its folds go on to infinity.” [3] It’s not even explained, not even explained.
First try to get a sense of this; it’s a very strange statement. Can you imagine there being a similar expression in Descartes, for those who know Descartes? No, it’s unimaginable: the folds of the soul. This expression is beautiful. You have to learn it by heart. Yes, it’s gotten lost. “It [the soul] could never bring out all at once everything that is folded into it because its folds go on to infinity.” But this [expression] gives us something. The fold, the Baroque fold goes on to infinity. The fold that goes on to infinity, it’s the pleat since it’s obvious that it’s not the Baroque that invented the fold. For example, in sculpture, there are always folds, if only through the presentation of clothing. A piece of clothing creates folds. Yes, certainly, a garment creates folds; every fold is not Baroque. Fine. So much the better. Our hypothesis is fine since we already have the differential characteristic of the Baroque. Yes, every fold is not Baroque, but not every fold goes on to infinity. When the fold goes on to infinity, then it’s Baroque.
Oh, but what can that even mean, the fold going on to infinity? So, every fold is pleated; that does not limit its usefulness – this is indeed what Leibniz says because, on the fold of the soul, he says: since they go on to infinity, these are pleated. That does not limit their usefulness for us. Above all, we will speak of the pleats of matter and the folds of the soul. Are there two levels, and should the Baroque thus be on two levels, one for the pleats of matter and one for the folds of the soul? This is already very important for us for then another question would be posed: what is the relation between the pleats of matter and the folds of the soul, and vice versa? You indeed sense that between the aggregates of folds, can a relation of causality be established? We can certainly establish bi-univocal correspondences. This will be a system – hey, a system! – a system of correspondences between the pleats of matter and the folds of the soul.
But finally, all that is rather obscure, but this obscurity is so much more relaxed, easy, than if we approached Leibniz’s philosophy abstractly – for it’s not an abstract philosophy like all philosophy – so that the first aspect [is]… I would like to establish a system of guideposts both in what is usually called the Baroque and in Leibniz’s philosophy.
My first [aspect in the] system of guideposts concerns the pleats of matter.[4]  I would say that the Baroque is the presentation of a form of matter that does not cease creating folds or being pleated back or being unfolded. Under this first aspect, this means that the Baroque is defined in fact, as a treatment of matter, which means what? Which consists of what? I would say that the treatment of matter is a treatment in bulk [en masse]. The Baroque treats matter in huge masses, and the notion of mass is fundamental within the Baroque. One of the best commentators and one of the first commentators on the Baroque is [Heinrich] Wölfflin, in a book that is without doubt, and remains, the best book or one of the best books on the Baroque, Renaissance and Baroque [1888]. Wölfflin emphasizes this first point, the treatment of matter in bulk as a characteristic of the Baroque. And as Wölfflin tells us, this is how the Baroque operates within the colossal or the huge, and he says that its characteristic is gravitas, gravity, weight. And we recognize Baroque architecture not in a single characteristic, but among [several] characteristics, within the following characteristic: the increase of architectural dimensions, but in what form? We are going to locate… Let’s try to establish some guideposts.
According to Wölfflin, the first characteristic is horizontal enlargement, a kind of enlargement that is located, for example, in the horizontal enlargement of facades in Baroque architecture. And this enlargement is confirmed by the lowering of the pediment – I am saying some very, very elementary things regarding architecture – the lowering of the pediment, or also the lower arch, henceforth elliptical, like a kind of gravitas, [or] the fullness of the wall that no longer allows the sight of articulations that operate there as a kind of … that is covered over, with its articulations covered over, implying an enlargement effect, [or] the pillar instead of the column, [with] the same effect, [or] staircases with lowered steps. For example, in Michelangelo, you already find not only lower steps on staircases, but as regards Michelangelo’s famous staircases, [Deleuze gets up and starts drawing on the board], I see it like this. Perhaps you sense the birth of the fold, and this confinement (renfermement), so this puffiness (boursouflure), with its lowered steps, this swelling, this puffiness produces a thrusting movement (mouvement en avant). [Deleuze sits down] Fine. Baroque staircases are the most delightful to climb, you know, the wide and low step. You hardly have the impression of climbing.
Fine. The second characteristic connecting to this is a kind of treatment of matter not simply by enlargement, but – suddenly you sense that this is connected; I have no desire to undertake logical deduction; you sense that these are very natural passages – so henceforth the treatment of matter [is] through softening (amollissement). The masses are soft, [hence] the treatment of mass not only in bulk, but in soft masses. In other words, the softness of the form in Michelangelo’s staircases is obvious. At the extreme, we would have to speak of a tendency of matter toward the fluid, a kind of turbulence of matter.
And what does this position of soft masses imply? It implies something that is essential, that will be essential for us today and for the next time: a rounding off of angled forms. As Wölfflin says, repeating it at several points so that it seems to be something fundamental concerning the Baroque, the right angle is avoided. For example, the acanthus is a famous leaf. The acanthus leaf is a famous leaf in architecture since it served as decorative motif since the Greeks. But there are two kinds of acanthus, at least, right? There is the acanthus, in Latin, acanthus mollis, with rounded leaves, and the acanthus spinosus, meaning pointed, edged. There is the rounded leaf, mollis, and the serrated leaf. The Baroque was not the first to employ this. The Baroque undertakes on its own the substitution of the soft acanthus, mollis, for the serrated acanthus leaf that dominated before the Baroque.
What does this mean, this tendency toward softness, toward the fluid, once again, represented by the rounding off of the angle, the avoidance of the right angle? At the extreme, this is like a conciliation of mass and water. There would be a lot to discuss about this softness of forms. For example, there’s Michelangelo who invented a curious procedure, creating architectural models (ébauches) not as sculptures, [but] his architectural models in clay. And once again, those who will read Wölfflin’s book, which is altogether beautiful, would find the extent to which he insists on this tendency in the Baroque of avoiding the right angle, of rounding off the form, that allows precisely for a clay-like model.
And at the extreme, I say that it’s a conciliation of mass and water. In fact, the Baroque is not only a kind of architecture, it’s an art of gardens, and the art of gardens entails a treatment of water. And Wölfflin himself, at the end of his book, insists on the art of Baroque gardens, with the three forms of treatment of water: the fountain, the waterfall, and the water feature, a lake or a pond. He shows that in all cases, the originality of the Baroque, of the Baroque garden, is that the water itself must act massively (faire masse), and in opposition to what? In opposition to clear streams, clear streams that, in contrast, dominate in all kinds of water structures. But the Baroque structure operates through massive forms of water, even in the fountain: the multiple water jets connect, constituting a mass. In the end, fluid is massive just as mass is fluid. [Pause] And at this level, we see that, henceforth, everything operates in bulk, the solid that is, in fact, a soft solid, the fluid that is, in fact, a massive fluid with turbulence, and yet in consonance with other masses.
Do you sense the birth of another theme? It’s that among the masses, there can only be harmony, harmony of masses, harmony as resonance of masses. Among the masses, there must be harmonies. And what does that mean? Well, it means that the masses of leaves and the masses of waters respond to one another, entering into counterpoint. And why into counterpoint? They are both audible (sonores). There are audible masses in correspondence with visual masses. The audible masses are called uproar (rumeurs), and the uproar of leaves must respond to the uproar of waters.
And Wölfflin insists greatly on this, how precisely in Baroque art, the leaves are treated as mass, from which results the rounding off of leaves, and not treated leaf by leaf, [but] as an art of mass, an art of mass that is the Baroque. Understand, simply, if this is an art of mass, understand that it’s an art of the soft, an art of the soft. Why is the mass soft? If that’s what creates mass, it’s a way of saying that mass cannot be engendered starting from individuals, from ultimate individuals. There are no ultimate individuals. This treatment is necessarily the mass treatment operating through softening, that is, through rounding off of angled forms. How to say what we are sensing here, that the angled form is the hard, that the rounding off of angled forms is the soft?
Good. So let’s try to identify… We just created a few guideposts on the level of the Baroque, you see? We move forward just a bit. What does it mean to create folds? [Sound of Deleuze’s chair; he goes to the board] I can say – let’s have a break here — you see, creating folds is what? Well, it’s rounding off angles, creating folds. We are not very far into this, but that’s it: to round off angles, but you sense that we have to change this expression for many things. Rounding off angles, hmm, this is whatever you want, but among other things, it’s possible that this is a mathematical operation. It’s possible that this could have lots of outcomes. How… Can you round off angles in math? Perhaps you can. Perhaps Leibniz never stopped rounding off angles. He was a great mathematician, so he was capable of doing that. So, we just say, here we are, the Baroque, you see, how does it create folds? By undertaking a treatment in bulk, and this treatment in bulk undertakes this by rounding off angles, by constituting [forms of] soft matter.
We have to see if Leibniz’s philosophy, even before you are familiar with it – I am looking for guideposts – if Leibniz’s philosophy is consonant with all that. Oh yes! Matter is treated so much in bulk by Leibniz that it is never separable from a term that Leibniz uses, the aggregate (l’agrégat). Matter proceeds through the aggregate, and the aggregate is the law of matter. The soul will have no less of a law as well, and the whole problem in Leibniz’s philosophy will be what the correspondence between these two laws is. I am saying immediately that the soul’s law is not the aggregate. It’s the series, but you sense perhaps that the series is also something very Baroque. Why? For the moment, that’s beyond us. Matter is divided into aggregates, and the aggregates are themselves divided into aggregates. An entire uproar of matter… On the level of matter, you will only find aggregates infinitely divisible and infinitely composable. So, I am just saying that aggregates ignore angles. Aggregates are curves. As they go all the way to infinity, a curve that goes to infinity is a fold. Aggregates create folds.
Let’s look at the guideposts a bit better with Leibniz. [The sound of Deleuze paging through a book] In all of his physics – and Leibniz is also a great physicist – in all of his physics, what does Leibniz create? [He creates] a physics of bodies that he himself calls elastic. For Leibniz, elasticity – and he tells us this in print – is the degree of fluidity of a body; [it’s] a physics of the elastic body or of the fluid body, elasticity meaning a degree of fluidity of the body. He is opposed to Descartes and to Descartes’s physics, no less than to the physics of Atomists, whether it’s the Atomists from antiquity or the Atomists from the seventeenth century who conceive of physics above all as being about the hard body. For Leibniz, there is no hard body, and he will never stop criticizing Descartes because the entire Cartesian physics is a physics of the hard body to the extent that certain Cartesians drew the correct consequence from Cartesian physics, to wit, they returned to Atomism, the atom being the smallest hard body. But for Leibniz, there is no atom. Every mass is composed of mass, all the way to infinity, no more than there is a hard body, every body being elastic, its elasticity being equal to its degree of fluidity. [This is] a physics of the fluid or of the body’s elastic force – in Latin, vis elastica, Leibniz says.[5]
And why? I would just like it a bit if you knew more, or perhaps some among you already know all this, but an essential point in Leibniz’s physics is what? Everyone knows; we learn that in high school. It’s having substituted the principle of conservation mv2 [squared] for mv. Descartes had stated mv; Leibniz says mv2: it’s his famous raising speed to the square. And we ask what this raising speed to the square might mean? It means a lot of things as we will see, but here I am satisfied with simple guideposts. V2 refers us to acceleration, and in fact, Leibniz will center his entire study, or will center a large part of his study on acceleration. And what is acceleration? It’s a difference; it’s a difference between the movement at a particular moment and the movement in the preceding state, in the preceding moment; or it’s between the movement at particular moment and the movement in the subsequent state. It’s a difference, or as Leibniz will say more precisely in mathematics, it’s a differential, a difference that can be, if you like, as small as you wish. To this differential, Leibniz gives a name: it’s the conatus of movement. [6] All this that I am saying is quite summary. We will see it later; we will see it much more precisely.
As there is a possibility of infinite analysis between two moments, there is an infinite sum of conatus [Pause] which is like degrees through which the body passes when the speed of its movement increases or when the speed of its movement slows, or when it passes from a state of rest into movement. We will say that movement is like an integral or an integration of elementary solicitations that Leibniz calls tendencies, that is, some conatus, such that Leibniz pretends to assign a genetic element of movement. The genetic element of movement is the element of a series of increasing or decreasing speeds, the element of a series of increasing or decreasing speeds, whereas Cartesian physics limited itself to the following model: the actual element of a given speed, in consideration of an actual element of a given speed, such as it appears in Descartes, [and] is substituted by Leibniz, the element of a series of increasing or decreasing speeds, a summons (summation) of conatus. That is, there is an infinity of degrees through which the mobile passes; there is an infinity of degrees through which the mobile passes when its speed increases or decreases. What is that? You understand? I just wanted to say this: this is the translation of the elasticity of the body in terms of movement. This regime of movement is the elasticity of the body. [Pause]
Perhaps you are not far from understanding how, in a physics of the elastic body, no rectilinear movement is possible. One must always round off, and round off to infinity. Movement will occur following curves, with variable curvature. But in this, finally, we are getting too far ahead, going too fast, but I have said some things, in fact, just as part of the guidepost of our topic. So, if you don’t understand this or that point or theme, it’s enough for you to understand one or two [points] since you can already sense that everything is harmonized at one level or another: the status of movement, the status of the elastic body. All of that corresponds; it’s a system of correspondences, and perhaps that’s what the word “system” means. [Pause]
And why… I would just link to insist: henceforth, why… We indeed see that the elastic body is a critique of the atom which is the very image of the hard body. But I say, “elastic body,” you can only think of it on a curve, with variable curvature. What does that mean? I am just saying… Well, I see how all of this connects; in fact, it connects quite well. You take an atom as hard body, hard body, indivisible (insécable)… [Interruption of the recording] [46:38]
 
Part 2
… Movement is nothing other than the correlation – this is how it is for Epicurus – nothing other than the correlation of the atom and the void. If there is movement, it’s because there are no atoms; as Lucretius said very well, there are atoms and there is the void; the correlation of the atom and the void is the movement as rectilinear movement. The atom falls into the void. [Deleuze goes to the board and draws] Straight lines, completely straight… Good… But there are atoms that fall into the void. All of that is annoying because they don’t meet. The solution from Epicurus, to explain the encounter, is famous, notably: incerto tempore… Here I speak Latin on purpose because I can’t do otherwise since I don’t know what that means. [Laughter; Deleuze continues drawing] “At one moment,” tempore, incerto, what is this? Fine. [7] Incerto tempore produces a small deviation, a tiny deviation to which Lucretius gives a famous name, the clinamen,[8]  a declination, that is, it leaves the straight line. Thanks to the clinamen, we understand that the atom encounters the atom and that atomic combinations occur, combinations of hard bodies. So I would say that the combinations [of hard bodies] here move off obliquely. It’s still a straight line. The compositions of hard bodies that are created are rectilinear.
All of that, I would like to have you feel… All of that, it’s quite superficial (gros), but each time, I am trying to create a kind of… to indicate the logical complementarities. If you provide yourself with a hard element, I believe that through evidence, well … If you provide yourself with a presumably absolutely hard element, you can only compose mixtures or combinations along a straight line. That is, you would have to engender curves through combinations of straight lines, which is quite possible, but this is a very special kind of mathematics.
So, here we are. The atom taking incerto tempore, does it do so at a given moment? Since Antiquity, people have made fun of the Epicureans, saying oh yeh, so that’s easy to say! At one moment, there is the atom leaving the vertical and taking a deviation with a small angle in relation to the vertical. This small angle, the angle of deviation, the angle of the clinamen — that gave Cicero quite a laugh — it’s not reasonable, it’s childish, all that. But incerto, it’s not clear that this means “at any given moment whatsoever”, not necessarily. And in fact, you know… [Deleuze continues writing on the board] Let’s assume the atom to be the smallest body. This isn’t entirely true since for the Epicureans, or for Lucretius, the atom has numerous parts. It does not constitute the minimum, but that doesn’t keep it from being indivisible (insécable). I mean that, to some extent, it doesn’t have indivisible parts. It’s the smallest indivisible body.
Fine. For Lucretius and for the Epicureans, the idea of the smallest body is obviously an eminent body, which is the smallest time, that is, the atom of time. What is this, the atom of time? It’s the smallest time thinkable, or rather I think [in] a time, during which the atom is in movement in a given direction. The smallest time… There you are. [Deleuze indicates his drawing and notes on the board] You think of the falling atom. Have you got it, in your mind? You think of the falling atom, of its duration, of its drop. Fine. You do the opposite experiment. It’s a thought experiment. You try to think (in) the smallest time that you can, think as the time in which the atom falls. So there is an atom of time, the smallest [time] during which the atom is thought of as falling, fine, falling in a straight line. Well then, you understand everything!
Incerto means what? Incerto means… Incerto tempore means in a time smaller than the minimum of thinkable time. If there is a minimum of thinkable time in which one must think of the atom’s fall, I can think of rest. In order to think of the atom’s movement, I have to think of it in time, falling in time, its descent occupying a certain time, and there, a minimum beyond which the atom will be necessarily thought of as being up (haut). If I say, let’s consider a time smaller than the minimum of thinkable time, you will tell me, I can’t think that. Fine, I can’t think that. I pose it; I don’t think it. I pose a time smaller than the minimum thinkable time. [Pause] I am saying the clinamen, the deviation, which occurs in this time. The deviation does not come on the vertical at any moment whatsoever; it is already presupposed through the entire rectilinear line. It affects the entire vertical. It launched an oblique, creating an oblique since incerto tempore means not in some arbitrary time whatsoever, but in a time smaller than the minimum thinkable time. So, there is a straight line, but it is always already oblique, such that the atom necessarily encounters the atom. [Deleuze may sit back down at this point]
This comes down to saying that a physics of hard bodies is what? It implies a rectilinear construction of components, and it implies oblique straight lines that are defined by the angle – these are angular formations – that are defined by the angle in relation to the vertical. In other words, the formations of hard bodies are rectilinear and angular.
Fine. Understand, this works fine for us, Leibniz’s physics, a physics of elastic bodies, and henceforth, of curvatures, and henceforth, of curvatures. We still don’t yet understand what that means, but elasticity rounds off the angles. Curvature is the rounding off of angles. The Leibnizian aggregates are masses infinitely composed of masses. Henceforth, they are curves. We can’t get away from it: you repeat that to yourself enough for you to understand it. I can do no better, because if you don’t understand, it’s because you haven’t yet repeated it enough in your mind. Soft masses are necessarily curves; elastic masses are necessarily curves. The mobile, here, is on an infinitely variable curve. What is the fold that goes all the way to infinity? It’s the curvature with a variable surface. It’s the line with variable curvature or the surface with variable curvature. This is what all of Descartes’s physics and mathematics could not detect: a physics of elastic bodies was required. And what does that imply? [It implies] special mathematical tools. We will see how these mathematical tools… As if by chance, these are infinite series and differential calculus. Fine. [Pause]
How are you doing? Still holding up? So a little later we are going… Today, this is a short session. [Here’s the] final point on this treatment in bulk. Let’s consider… You see, we are establishing guideposts. First, [there’s] the body in general (quelconque), good, with its enlargement and its lowering. And then, [there’s] the second guidepost, the elastic or even fluid body. And all that is a way of saying: what does it mean to create folds? Matter creates folds; it doesn’t follow the angles. Understand? Good. That’s what Leibniz’s philosophy is. [Pause]
Let’s confirm a third and final guidepost, the living body, the folds of flesh. It’s a constant theme. There is a poem; there’s a Baroque poet, a very great Baroque poet, John Donne. There is a beautiful poem by him; I don’t dare recite it to you in English, because… He speaks about a pair of lovers, and he says, “You are both fluid,” “You are both fluid.”[9] [Donne’s poem “The Ecstasy”] But this is the Baroque conception of mass. Mass is fundamentally fluid, and you no longer have any angles. And in the same poem, he will add, “Your face flows…”[10] The love poem is perpetually penetrated by metaphors of fluid. This is how one creates a Baroque poem, a great Baroque poem.
Good, but I am saying [that] the living body… that in fact, it’s the least of things to say that the living body, or flesh, creates folds – folds and pleats of flesh. Fine, but why does it create folds? For two reasons, for two reasons, I believe, and here, we have to return to all sorts of ancient biological doctrines in which Leibniz participated. You have to place yourself with the initial astonishment at the discovery of the microscope, and you have to resituate all this philosophy of life under two expressions, which are not literally in Leibniz’s works, but the spirit is there. The first expression is: “All flies are within the first fly”; all flies are within the first fly. I cannot say that this is signed by Leibniz, or that Leibniz said it or repeated it, but it’s a commonplace of the philosophy of life at the end of the seventeenth century, one that comes to be confirmed by the discovery of the microscope. What does this mean, “all flies are within the first fly”? It means that the first fly that God created contained all the others, that is, contained the infinity of flies to come. It’s a lyrical expression to qualify what is called the pre-formation of germs, or the point of view of pre-formation. The primitive egg contained all the eggs to come, but that would mean nothing if we only said the primitive egg contains the organism. In other words, the primitive egg envelops the organism, and envelops as well all the organisms to come of the same species. It’s the thesis of pre-formation.[11]
It envelops: what does that mean? It means that there is something in mathematics called a kind of homothety, a homothety from small to large, or rather from large to small, however small it might be.[12] The organism envelops organisms to infinity. The first fly contains all the flies to come? Yes, but in a miniscule state, and each fly, in turn, contains an infinity of flies, smaller and smaller flies. If you will, this is the simple reason, the vulgarized vision of the theory of preformation of germs, at the level of the living. The organism contains an infinity of organisms, simply smaller and smaller, and what does that mean? [That means] that the whole concept of life is going to be encompassed starting from movements – here, I come again to operations – starting from the operations of envelopment and development.
Envelopment: I am saying this because to envelop is to create folds; to develop is to unfold, and in Latin, the language spoken so often in that era, this is constant, the pairs implicare-explicare, to implicate-to explicate ; involvere-devolvere, to envelop-to develop ; involvere-evolv [Deleuze corrects himself] Evolvere… The three couples: involver-evolver, are strictly synonymous.[13] Impliquer-expliquer: that which is developed, is explained; that which is enveloped, is implicated, or evolves. Based on this, when you find in a text from this era the word “evolution,” certainly don’t believe – I don’t even need to tell you this; it would be a kind of limitless stupidity – that you have discovered an ancestor of evolutionism. For in all these texts, the word “evolution” is used strictly in an opposite sense from what evolutionism will give it, since in evolutionism… What is the innovation in evolutionism at the end of the nineteenth century? It’s to tell us [that] evolution occurs through the production of some new thing, that is, through epigenesis. Evolution occurs through the production of a new thing. That’s the evolutionist idea: starting from the egg, the egg undergoes operations that will produce something new, that is, something that is not encompassed in the egg.
But previously, before evolutionism, in what was called the preformation stage, the word “evolution” does indeed exist. The living being evolves. But what does that mean, “evolve”? It means, if you prefer, to increase [augmenter], just as involver means “to diminish”, or if you prefer once again, evolver means to unfold [se déplier], exactly as the butterfly unfolds.[14] It unfolds, or rather it refolds into the cocoon, but the living being passes through alternation of folding and unfolding. To evolve is to unfold one’s parts. The organism unfolds when it unfolds its own parts, and folds itself when it pleats its own parts. Pleating its own parts, it becomes smaller and smaller. Unfolding its own parts, placing them outside one another, it becomes larger and larger. Evolution is a matter of increase, with conservation of similarity, hence the homothety, you see? And involution is the reverse symmetry of evolution; it’s the diminution with conservation of similarity, such that – here I am saying that this is frequent, for example, in Malebranche and in Leibniz, all that – such that… But Leibniz is going to derive from this some very astonishing consequences. I am telling you immediately so that you will sense the extent to which, in the living body, the notion of the folds finds its importance.
So there are rhythms of folds and unfolds that traverse the living being. That is what creates the flesh, the flesh that’s irreducible to infinity, on the contrary, expressible, unfolding its own parts. The organism folds and pleats its own parts, unfolds and again pleats its own parts. It’s very beautiful vision of the living being, since from this, Leibniz derives the idea that – and it is here that he becomes original – he derives a source for vitalism. What is his vitalism? His vitalism consists in saying: the living being is a machine. You will tell me that “the living being is a machine” is not a vitalist proposition; it’s a mechanicist proposition, that is, precisely the opposite. Well then, precisely not! For, as Leibniz says, and here he becomes quite brilliant – he is so all the time, always brilliant, but here particularly – he says: Do you know what the mechanistic lacks? What is missing in the mechanistic and the mechanicism is that they [mechanicist proponents] understand nothing about the machine. In fact, what is opposed to the mechanistic is the machinic. It’s a great, great idea. Why? Because something mechanical is indeed a machine, he says; only it’s a machine that refers to final parts that, in themselves, are not a machine.  For example, it refers to a piece of steel that has taken a particular form, but this piece of steel is not in itself a machine. In other words, something mechanical is a finite machine; it’s a machine whose ultimate parts are not machines, whereas a machine, what is it? It’s a machine that goes on to infinity. It’s a machine in which all the parts to infinity are still machines. It’s a machine machined to infinity. In other words, vitalism equals machinism, the only way to show that the living being is not something mechanical; that is, the living being is a machine.
Paragraph 64 of the Monadology, [Deleuze looks in his edition] this is really a beautiful text: “Every organized body of a living thing is a kind of divine machine or natural automaton.” So we say, alright, this is a mechanicist proposition. But wait for what comes next: “Because a man-made machine isn’t a machine in every one of its parts”; because a man-made machine isn’t a machine in every one of its parts. This is a mechanism, something mechanical; it’s not a machine. “For example, a cog on a brass wheel has parts or fragments which to us are no longer anything artificial, and bear no signs of their relation to the intended use of the wheel.”[15] “But Nature’s machines”, that is, natural machines or living beings “– living bodies, that is – are machines even in their smallest parts, right down to infinity,” an infinitely machined machine. Henceforth, they never cease being folded, so there is a homothety of the parts and the whole. And what is the whole if not the unfolded part? And what is the part if not the whole that is enveloped and pleated?
[This leads] to the point that Leibniz can ask – and you know, it’s not complicated, the story that has frightened pious souls – what happens with death? But with death, it’s very simple. I am going to tell you what happens with death.[16] In fact, there is no soul without the body, so the idea that at death, our soul is separated from the body is an entirely stupid question just to simplify things. That’s not it; in fact, there is no soul without the body. Simply, at death, our body is enveloped to infinity, such that it becomes livable infinity. And although one might then have oneself cremated, incinerated, that changes nothing, for in the ashes, there will still be a body, however small it might be, something that is my body in the way it is enveloped to infinity. And God’s judgment? I still maintain a body at death; I maintain a body. Simply this body is infinitely enveloped, infinitely pleated onto itself. It’s such a beautiful idea, and what about God’s judgment? On the day of final judgment, there you have all the infinitely pleated bodies since death coming forth, exactly like a butterfly unfolds, leaving its cocoon; the butterfly unfolds. Well when the judgment of God sounds forth, our bodies will again unfold, and we will, in fact, discover the bodies that will have never left us, that simply had become like so many infinitely folded pinpoints. This is beautiful. This is the infinitely machined machine that you can grasp on these two levels: either infinite contractions – the body infinitely folded onto itself – or infinite extension – the body unfolded on itself, the glorious body of the final judgment.
So, why one must still criticize mechancism is for having understood nothing about machines, and vitalism is the identity of the living being with an infinitely machined machine. So that is the first aspect that, if you will, concerns the organism. There is an infinity of organisms in the organism, that is, an infinity of organisms are folds into each organism. There are flies from flies from flies to infinity. And here we have the other aspect of vitalism – there’s another aspect — which is that, henceforth… But organisms themselves, where do they come from? They no doubt come from simple living beings since they are aggregates of organisms. They come from simple living beings, but I don’t yet know what that means. We will see later about “the Simple” in Leibniz, as this might exist, since everything goes on to infinity. Were there no simple beings… I say randomly, in any event, [that] the simple living beings would exist on another level than the one where we are.
So if that is the case, what will the second aspect of vitalism be? It’s that an organism is always created from a portion of matter insofar as it is animated by simple elements. You see? The first aspect of vitalism is an organicism; the second aspect [is] what is the organism made of? [Of] simple elements insofar as they animate a portion of matter, however small it might be. This time, it’s no longer the viewpoint of the egg; it’s the viewpoint of the animalcule, and this is well known in all histories of life, of the notion of life. You will find arguments between schools in the seventeenth century, between a school called Ovism, the egg, the Ovists, and the other calling itself the Animalculists, partisans of animalcules. What counts most, the egg or, in the end, the spermatozoid? It’s a problem that will continue everywhere subsequently. These are the two points of view of vitalism.
Leibniz brings both of them together quite well. What is an organism made of, that is, the organic material? What is it made of? Well, on the second level, it is said, organic material is made of simple elements animating a portion, however restrained it might be, of inorganic matter. You understand? We have passed from the egg to animalcules. And, this is the path of the microscope. Leibniz’s texts on the microscope are fundamental texts for all philosophy. And so, from this comes a new series of entirely brilliant formulae from Leibniz consisting in telling us about this second viewpoint on animalcules, you see, the simple elements that animate a portion of inorganic matter, however small it might be. What does that come down to saying? That comes down to saying that everything is not alive. Of course, everything isn’t alive! There is inorganic matter, material masses, that are not living. Everything is not alive, but everywhere there are living beings, and I know very few philosophies of life that are as beautiful, even among modern philosophies, as this idea of the diffusion of living beings in Leibniz. You see, this is something else.
The first aspect of vitalism was increases and decreases, that is, envelopments and developments. The second aspect of vitalism is diffusion, the diffusion of animalcules in all portions, whatever they might be, of inorganic matter. And this is as if he was telling us – there are all sorts of Leibniz’s texts suggesting this – it’s as if he was telling us, you understand, in a pond, or in a lake – the treatment of waters in the Baroque – in a lake or a pond, everything is not a fish, but there are fish everywhere [in lakes or ponds]. Everything is not a fish in the world, but there are fish everywhere. It’s the second aspect of vitalism. This time, it returns to the expression about simple elements diffused in every [kind of] portion of inorganic matter, however small it might be.
And in the correspondence with Arnauld, Leibniz is going to follow a comparison – here again [are] the rapports of harmony, consonances, between two cases of matter, the lake full of fish, on one hand, and on the other, the chaos of marble.[17] His texts are sublimes, very, very beautiful. The chaos of marble appears to be the hardest body. And Leibniz is going to show that [Deleuze speaks quite loudly here, with emphasis] the chaos of marble does not differ in nature from the pond full of fish; and in the chaos of marble as well, there is an infinity of diffused animalcules. [Pause]
So, good… Fine. Everything is not a fish, but there are fish everywhere. The world is a pond full of fish. I would say that this vitalism matters to us because it confirms … What does it confirm? The treatment in bulk. I am summing up our results: the treatment in bulk as a possible definition of the Baroque operates on all levels by folding and unfolding. [Pause] Second concluding proposition: the folds and unfolds go all the way to infinity. This is the difference of the Baroque from all other formations. Third conclusion: if this is so, then bodies are not hard bodies, but elastic bodies and, at the extreme, fluid bodies, and their paths are not rectilinear, but curved, [Pause] and their operation consists in perpetually rounding off angles, avoiding the angle, necessarily through a curvature, through a variable curvature.
There we are, the first aspect that concerned us: is there a treatment of matter that might be called Baroque? You are going to take a break, but not for very long. And then you can reflect a bit, and you can tell me if there are any difficulties or questions. [Short pause for a break]
So I’d like you to understand well that this is an introduction that has not at all opened up the philosophy of Leibniz. We are creating guideposts, some very general guideposts. All that we have done during this first part was the treatment of matter according to Leibniz, and asked: is this a treatment that could be called Baroque, and in what sense? No problems? No questions? Good, so let’s continue.
We were dealing earlier with the level of matter, defined as the level of aggregates, if you will, the lowest level. Now, we are going to deal with a higher level, and in fact, we are following Wölfflin’s path who speaks about what exists above this first level of lowered and softened matter. And this second level that we are considering is now obviously that of form, or formal cause, or if you prefer, the genetic element of form. And just as earlier there was a status of matter, now we must expect there to be a certain status of the soul. Just as matter never ceased folding and unfolding, well, there are folds and pleats in the soul. As we saw in the Monadology, paragraph 61: there are folds and pleats in the soul. Everything suggests to us that perhaps, for Leibniz, these folds and pleats in the soul are like ideal elements of form. But here we will require lots of guideposts and explanations in order to understand what that might mean, ideal elements of form, genetic elements of forms. The souls would contain the genetic elements of forms, but it would contain the genetic elements of forms insofar as it creates folds and pleats, or at least insofar as there are folds and pleats within it. You sense that here as well, Leibniz is returning to find that Descartes’s conception of the souls is rather like a ridiculous summary.
Good, so what are these, the ideal elements? Folds would be ideal and genetic elements that would account for forms. And in other words, the genetic element of the fold is what? I am saying that the genetic element of the fold, is the point that describes the curve, the point on a curve, the point on a curve with variable curvature. [Deleuze returns to the board]. I am offering a kind of drawing of this in a very general form. [He draws on the board] There. You recognize the curve with variable curvature. The simplest case is the curve with invariable curvature, I would say. [He sits down again] We can stop there because you have understood everything; I mean that all of our work this year solely concerns – over a long stretch of time – commenting on this figure. [Unclear what figure this is from the context]
What is this figure, the curve with variable curvature, or the curve with constant curvature? I would say that is an inflection, it’s an inflection.[18] What is an inflection? An inflection – I am generally using language from mathematics – the inflection of a line is a singularity, that is – oh, it’s not complicated – a singularity is something that happens to a line; it’s an event, something that happens to a line, the curvature. We will call it point of inflection; it’s a singular point. Every singular point is not an inflection, but the point of inflection is a singular point, the singular point of this inflection. In general, singularities are not independent from an axis of coordinates, but the inflection is independent of any axis of coordinates. It does not assume any coordinates.
That’s what I want to ask: Can we say that there is a genetic irreducibility of the inflection? That is, we have to grasp the inflection as the production of an ideal genesis, as genetic element, that is, as the genetic element that endangers forms. There you are. It seems to me… I cannot say that… It seems to me that this is how it is in Leibniz. The element that engenders forms, the genetic element of forms, is not the rectilinear straight line. It’s the curve with constant variation, the curve with variable curvature, or inflection. [It’s the] irreducibility of the inflection; you still sense this first session’s obsessive theme, always rounding off angles. [Pause]
So, if it’s that, I would then say, from the point of view of form… From the point of view of matter, [in] the Baroque, we proposed the following idea: the Baroque is what treats matter in bulk, that is, through folds and pleats going on to infinity. Now, I would say that the Baroque is what treats form through the genetic element of inflection. [Pause] For the moment, I cannot say more on this, except that we already have to reflect. We have to stop each time, you know, and then look for help, reach out for help. When one speaks or when one writes, there are several things. When one speaks, you need to seek help, [from] you [students], but up to now, silence alone has answered me back. I can say, help me! Yes! Inflection would be conditional. This would be the genetic element of forms.
Good. We just saw that this is very special, inflection, but what does that mean? I am calling on you for help! And suddenly, by calling on you for help, something crossed through my memory, drawings, some drawings of a famous painter. That’s what flashed in my memory, yes, it’s in Paul Klee. Ah, I tell myself, yes, but [with] Paul Klee, I am going to get criticized: the Baroque, all of this, it’s just random! So obviously, not at all! It’s not me; it’s Paul Klee. Paul Klee was enormously interested in the Baroque. He wrote on the Baroque. So, if he wrote on the Baroque and found merit in the Baroque, perhaps his own drawings… And in a small, marvelous book by Paul Klee, Theory of Modern Art, there is a study of forms in movement. But the forms in movement presuppose an engendering of forms starting from a movement. And what does he tell us, that is, a genesis of forms? So Klee speaks to us under the title “Pedagogical Outlines,” and his pedagogical outlines begin with the affirmation that “the point needs nothing other than its own spontaneity.” This you must retain since we will find it again in Leibniz; you will see in what sense this is mathematically, physically… all of that. It’s a key idea [clé = key, homonym to Klee] – hey, funny! [Laughter] – It’s a fundamental idea for Leibniz. The point needs only its spontaneity. The point’s spontaneity, what could that mean? Well, the point’s spontaneity is inflection. The point only needs its own spontaneity to follow a curve of inflection.
If I insist on this regarding Klee, it’s because you will see that there is an anti-Klee who is no less a great painter, notably Kandinsky, and that everything… And that this marks their painting, these theoretical stories from the exterior. This is inscribed in their painting. For Kandinsky, on the contrary, the point can enter into movement only under external constraint, such that all of Kandinsky’s painting will be conceived as dealing with tension, the tension exerted on the point to go into movement. And the whole conception of painting for Klee – if there ever was a painter that one could call spontaneous, on the condition of noting that spontaneous obviously does not being creating just anything – the point follows the curve of inflection through its own spontaneity.
The point is therefore the genetic element by itself of what Klee calls, the “active line,” and the active line is this:[19] the drawing on top, that is, an inflection. Eh? Don’t look at anything but the top one ! [Laughter; Deleuze’s book circulates among the students] What’s better than this?! The second figure… Henceforth we will follow… You understand, this is what a relay system is. So I was getting bogged down with my story of inflection. Can it be the genetic element of form? Wouldn’t that be how things are in Leibniz? Since you cannot have me speak directly to Leibniz, since we don’t yet have those means… Everything that is outside Leibniz, so, I didn’t quite know how to proceed. And on this, it’s Klee that gives us the answer. Perfect! Very good! We have only to follow him.
The second figure [Deleuze continues showing the book’s illustration]… It’s a bit far away. I could make a drawing on the board, but I’ve had enough of that. You see, the second figure, the one underneath the first, is all interconnected with another much more capricious line. Fine… It’s when folds… the fold of inflection gets cut across by a line that seems to be a random line, an uncertain (aléatoire) line. But it is precisely possible that the line of inflection offers us a kind of law of the uncertain line.
The third figure – he doesn’t comment on this very well… No, he does comment well on this, so I withdraw what I said – the third, you see, is very interesting because what has he done? What has Paul Klee done? He doesn’t say it, but it is nonetheless interesting. [Pause] What he has done is to mark the shadows along the side of the inflection’s concavity. Henceforth, the cross-hatching changes around the inflection point. Eh? [Pause; one hears the chalk marks as Deleuze draws on the board] So what does that create that is innovative? [Deleuze sits down] It’s that each time, along the concavity, necessarily on the side of the concavity, a center of curvature is defined, a center of curvature, that is going to vary according to the portion of inflection considered from one side to the other of the inflection point. And again here, I note the case of inflection with constant curvature. If I consider the case of inflection with constant curvature, the center of curvature will vary such that the center of curvature will be on one side as on the other an inflection point, what we can call an enveloper (une enveloppante), a region corresponding to the curvature, [Deleuze again draws on the board] according to the convergent straight lines. I sense that this is getting complicated, but finally… Notice [that] the center of curvature is going to change directions — it’s quite simple – and necessarily will not be a point, but will be defined by an enveloper. Fine.
We will leave it there for the moment, for Klee’s drawings, and I complicate things by saying how about Kandinsky? Kandinsky is entirely different. Why? Since for him, the point is normally at rest, there is no spontaneity of the point. Henceforth, the point only moves when a force is exerted on it, pulling it from rest. Henceforth, the line that the point travels along under an external effort will obviously be a straight line. This will be a straight line, and thus, in Kandinsky’s text, Point and Line to Plane, he passes from the point to the straight line under the influence of a force or tension, and tells us: There are three kinds of straight lines, other straight lines only being variants. The simplest straight line is the horizontal line. Opposite this line we fine at a right angle the vertical line. The third line is the diagonal, schematically seen in at an angle identical to the two other preceding lines, thus having the same inclination of both, that is, as a bisector.
Fine. What am I going to say? If I now say that this would be clear, if I say that [for] Kandinsky, this is a painting of the hard body, and what is so brilliant in Kandinsky? What was Kandinsky able to trace as no other person could trace, by introducing tension here? Anyone who has seen three paintings by Kandinsky would answer that it’s the angles, it’s the angles. This is a painting of the hard body in which movement is angled and in which bodies are composed through rectilinear lines. It’s the most angles in composition ever accomplished in painting.
If we try schematically to describe Klee, we would say [that] it’s a painting of the elastic body. Here, these elastic bodies in Klee, you would find some so admirable. It’s a painting of the elastic body in which the point travels spontaneously; it’s a painting of spontaneity, only it’s not Klee’s own spontaneity, but the spontaneity of the point on the canvas, where the point’s spontaneity is defined through the inflection that the point pursues. Henceforth, it’s a painting that does not cease taking the edges off angles, rounding off the angle, inflecting the angle. [Pause]
Someone who worked here [at Vincennes-St. Denis], in fact, at some point several years ago, named Bernard Cache, and who is interested in the Baroque, recently published a study, or is currently preparing a very interesting study – because he has a background as an architect – a very interesting study precisely on the problem of inflections in architecture.[20] And his departure point is a bit like Klee’s, so we come back to it: the variations of the inflection. So forget Klee now. We used him to confirm this kind of suspicion we had: can the inflection be treated as the genetic element of forms, and under what conditions, specifically the inflection considered as the point’s spontaneity?
And all that is literally Leibnizian, that there would be a spontaneity of the point, that the point needs nothing other to enter into movement – all of these are constant themes in Leibniz’s physics, mathematics, and metaphysics, such that it’s entirely precise for me to say, yes, there is something Leibnizian in Klee. But then, these variations – I am speaking of an inflection – I can submit them to operations of symmetry, [Deleuze returns to the board] in which I would no longer have an inflection point, but a turning point (point de rebroussement) to produce this. [He indicates his drawing] Another symmetry can give me an ogive, or pointed arch. The first figure, [it’s] inflection; the second figure, [it’s] through turning (rebroussement);[21] the third figure, no matter, by another symmetry, [it’s] an ogive. I can… These are figures that you can locate; you will locate them already in the Gothic [style]. If I multiply the ogive line, I would have a figure of liquid flowing. [Pause; Deleuze continues drawing] But, through symmetry, a fourth figure… (one-two-three, yes)… But by prolonging the curvature, [Pause] and here’s what you have! This is becoming prettier and prettier! So, by prolonging the curvature… Why am I insisting on this? This is what a truly Baroque figure is. You see? Very often in Baroque architecture, in the decorative motifs… [Pause; he continues drawing] … the same things on this side… [Laughter] Do you recognize it? Thanks to simple decorative motifs, you say, hey, it’s a Baroque church! [Laughter] The enlargement, there it is. I have summed up today’s meeting: enlargement, the motif of inflection that opens you to the ideal genesis. Fine. On the other side, it’s the same… There you have a very beautiful decorative motif. [He continues drawing] You can also see a kind of starfish there – it’s possible – no longer through prolonging, but by rotation around an inflection point. [Deleuze returns to his seat] You can have a wave, a fluctuation through continuation to infinity. Eh?
So, we are advancing a little bit into the idea of the genetic element of forms, the genetics of forms. But why? I would say, look at how the inflection does not stop. It is itself a fold. That’s what is curious, the spontaneity of the straight line… the spontaneity of the point (not the straight line). The straight line is what? It’s when the point… it’s when the point… exactly, the straight line responds to the case in which the point undergoes an external causality. So yes, as Leibniz says, in a very beautiful text, if the point undergoing the external causality, if it is considered abstractly, if the point is considered abstractly, then what does it follow? It does not follow the curve; it follows the tangent to the curve, that is, a straight line. But if it is considered in its spontaneity, then it is presumed to travel along an inflection, and through this, it engenders forms or the form. As an inflection with variable curvature, it is probable that it engenders forms.
But what does spontaneity of the point mean? I can give you the answer in advance, because Leibniz’s answer in advance is that the point’s spontaneity is what? It’s the point as point of view. But here, we are not yet ready to understand. It’s when the point is determined as point of view that the point’s spontaneity appears, and the view is again like an inflection. This is just to tell you… It’s not so you will understand, but that you will feel this.
So there we are. I would like to end today — because this is enough — on a final, difficult point. We have passed from one level of matter and treatment of matter in bulk to another level, the treatment or the genesis of forms. And why? Why did we have to join them? I would say, provided that I can justify this the next time, that just as the first level is constituted by aggregates going to infinity, so too the second level, the level of inflections, is constituted by series going to infinity. And the question remains: why must we go beyond the first level? That is, why isn’t it enough to speak of folds of matter, of pleats of matter? Why do we have to go all the way to pleats of the soul that can be considered as the genetic element of forms?
There is a very important text by Leibniz, and rather difficult. [Deleuze consults his book] I would just like to read to you so that you might consider this. I am reading very slowly because our goal the next time will certainly be to comment on this text in detail. It’s a text on physics, in a letter that is an answer to [Pierre] Bayle, who was an 18th century author, very anti-Leibnizian and who criticized him a lot. There is a letter from Leibniz to Bayle where this is written:
“Any point at all you take in the world,” that is, movement from any point at all, “moves along a predetermined line which that point has adopted once and for all, and which nothing can make it abandon.”[22] This is a bit mysterious. Let’s hold on to: “any point at all,” “[a movement that occurs] along a predetermined line which that point has adopted once and for all,” understanding that this point [is] adopted once and for all as long as there is nothing else that makes it change. “It is true that this line would be straight…” – there are a lot of people who say, well, if you only have a point on a line, it’s necessarily a straight line that travels along the point. This is even an expression about inertia. Leibniz tells us entirely the same thing. “In fact, if the point were all alone in the world its line would be straight”; if this point could be alone in the world, the line would be straight, that is, what does that mean? It would be straight, straight being defined as a tangent to the possible curve, to the virtual curve, passing through the point. You sense that Leibniz wants to tell us: in fact, the point follows a curved line; in fact, the point follows a curved line. And it ought to follow a curved line if it were alone in the world. Notice that “alone in the world” certainly does not mean “spontaneous”; it means “abstract.” If the point is treated as an abstraction, then yes, it follows the straight line, notably, it follows a line that is always a tangent, so it follows a straight line.
But it’s not alone in the world. Henceforth, it does not follow a straight line, and we can say that no point follows a straight line. Why? He tells us in the text: “Because there is the collaboration of all other bodies”; because there is the collaboration of all bodies, that is, there is an intersection of bodies. “Also it is by just that collaboration that the line is pre-established”, and the preestablished line through the collaboration of bodies is obviously a curve, and a curve with variable curvature since, following the neighboring bodies, it changes according to the movement and displacement of the point. So the line is not straight by virtue of the mechanical laws since the movement occurs due to the movement of all the bodies. And it’s by this very collaboration that the line is pre-established and determined. And he says abruptly, brutally – this comes back to saying, ok, in the end, by virtue of all the bodies one upon the other, with one another, the point follows a curve; it follows a curve with variable inflection according to the kind of neighboring [bodies].
It’s time. I sense that you are already tired, but it’s very important that you understand. Finally, so it’s like this, and then… [Pause] The question is why does Leibniz add [this] – there is no gap in the text – he just said that it’s the collaboration of all the bodies that determines, that pre-establishes the point as line of curvature, as curved line. So he continues abruptly, “So I claim that there is no real spontaneity in a mass.” In fact, spontaneity is not properly in mass, you see. What mass means is the composite of the body considered with the other bodies under the regime of the collaboration of bodies. In this, one can say that there is a determination of a body by others; [thus] there is no spontaneity. Spontaneity can not be in the mass since the mass is an agglomerate of agglomerates, an aggregate of aggregates. So this is a regime of external determination. Thus, “So I claim that there is no real spontaneity in a mass,” unless it grasped the entire universe, that is, unless it grasped the aggregate of all aggregates. For, if this point could begin by existing alone, if it were extracted from the mass, it would continue not at all in the pre-established line, in the curve, but in the straight tangent. This is clear. And on this point, he is going to become the most mysterious.
Here we have precisely, it seems to me, what this indeed difficult text tells us for the moment: [first proposition] if the point were abstract and all alone, it would follow a straight line. Let’s say [that] Kandisky places himself into the hypothesis of the abstract point; he would follow a straight line. It would be a tangent with virtual curvatures. Second proposition: in fact, the concrete point follows a curve with variable curvature, and these are concrete movements. Why? Because the line that it follows is pre-established through the variable collaboration of other bodies. Third proposition: the collaboration of bodies with a body defines a mass, and this is not yet spontaneity. The concrete point must have a spontaneity that explains in the final instance that it follows a curve with variable curvature. And this spontaneity, it’s not the mass that can account for it. Moreover, bodies would not collaborate with each other; there would not be —  on the contrary, the mass demands, assumes this spontaneity – bodies would not collaborate with each other if there were not a spontaneity of the point that follows the curve with variable curvature. So, instead of the collaboration of bodies explaining the spontaneity of the inflection, the collaboration of bodies presupposes the spontaneity of the inflection. In other words, and this is all that I want us to sense from this text, the treatment of matter refers to a genesis of forms, and assumes a genesis of forms.
And how is it going to express the spontaneity of the point that is located neither in the point all alone, nor in the mass? The spontaneity of the point, here is what [Leibniz] tells us about it: “So strictly speaking [it’s] in the substantial form,” the form, eh? “So strictly speaking [it’s] in the substantial form”, in parentheses, “of which this point is the point of view” – “that spontaneity is located”. We have something like three stages: the point all alone that would follow a straight line; the collaboration of other bodies, that is, the mass that predetermines a curved line; and the mass itself, [that] would remain incomprehensible if it did not refer to a superior spontaneity. This superior spontaneity is when the point is neither all alone, nor caught in a mass, but when it has become point of view. For the moment, this is unintelligible.
So let’s take another step forward. If the spontaneity of the point is the point determined as point of view, what are the centers of curvature, of inflection? It’s they that trace an enveloper, in its variation, and that jumps from one side to the other, back and forth at a point of inflection, and this is the center of curvature on the side of the concavity. This is precisely a point of view. It’s the point as point of view; it’s the point as point of view, and its at the level of the point as point of view that all of the bundles of straight lines are going to meet, the convergent straight lines from the curvature all the way to the center of curvature.
In other words, all that I wanted for you to feel is that the idea that there was a matter susceptible to folds and pleats was insufficient. This was a level that we necessarily had to go beyond toward another, deeper level, or rather, a higher level. It was not sufficient. In other words, matter does not account for folds and pleats that affect it. Here we are, I am again becoming clear, becoming limpid. Matter does not account for folds and pleats that affect it; that is, the collaboration of bodies accomplishes the curvature, but does not account for it. The curvature has to refer to a free spontaneity. This free spontaneity will be determined as the spontaneity of the point as point of view. But for the moment, we don’t even understand that. We can just say that this spontaneity is directly expressed in the inflection and the series that emerge from it. In other words, [it’s] that these are the folds of the soul [that] cite the inflection as free spontaneity – I assimilate it precisely into the folds of the souls or into the genetic element of the fold – I can say that it’s the folds of the soul that alone account for the ideal genesis of forms, and that the folds and pleats of matter presuppose this second region of folding (plissement) of folds and pleats. Sense that we are moving toward a kind of absolute transformation of the notions of subject and object.
Good. This is, however, confusing. Have you understood somewhat, or not at all, because I have to grasp if I have to start over with this the next time? But if you say nothing to me, I won’t know if you have understood or not… It doesn’t matter to me, but I would like to know if… I mean, I have the impression that all that at the end was not very comprehensible, but… [A student answers] It’s just that I am in a bad situation; I am indeed forced to assume certain things about Leibniz, so I cannot manage it. I’m caught in … [End of the recording and the session] [2:14:17]

Session 2, 4 November 1986: Review and Passage from the Fold to the Infinite Series
Part 1
So, those of you who have been kind enough to come today have to be sure that Leibniz interests you, and that you draw the consequences of this, that is, that you are reading some Leibniz. On this point, I’d appreciate it at the next meeting if those of you registered for the course give me a note on which you tell me that you are enrolled at Paris VIII and especially state the cycle to which you belong – first, second or third – and specifics about what you are doing this year. Are there any first cycle students here? Three… four, five… That’s fine because I need some [Laughter] since, you recall, the first part of our course is particularly devoted to students in the first cycle. So there you are. So, let’s continue.
So in sum, I would like to be more precise about our goal this year with the condition that this goal might be modest, I mean, something small that might strike you while reading Leibniz. What is immediately striking is a kind of proliferation of principles. One gets the impression, literally, that Leibniz never stops pulling principles out of his sleeve. It’s a rather odd impression, this proliferation of principles because, generally, while principles were known in philosophy a long time before Leibniz, philosophy demanded an economy of principles. Leibniz is without doubt the first great philosopher who never stopped adding one principle to another. He pulls them out really in the mode “You want a principle? I’ve got it here!” And after all, inventing principles is not an insignificant matter.
I am saying that philosophy has always known principles, notably the three logical principles: the principle of identity, the principle of contradiction, the principle of the excluded middle. A is A, principle of identity; A is not A, principle of contradiction; A is A or non-A, principle of the excluded middle. And then, perhaps, already at another level, philosophy was familiar with principles, distinguishing purely logical principles, that one might call the principles of existence, for example, the principle of causality, the principle of finality.
And about Leibniz, one gets the sense that he never ceased adding on to them. His philosophy is an overflowing invention of principles. This is odd, and why? I am saying that it’s an immediate impression from reading him. He never ceases circling around a principle to present it under several forms, or else he ceaselessly adds principles for ones already known. And I would almost say that in Leibniz, principles are teeming so much that they create an exclamatory proposition, that is, something to which one immediately wants to add an exclamation point. If we take that seriously, does this mean that we could consider the exclamation point as a special sign? Insofar as it’s a philosophical sign, one must say that the philosopher who enunciates and multiplies principles is the philosopher exclaiming.
So are there philosophical exclamations, and what would that be, a philosophical exclamation? As a result, we readers, we perpetually get the impression from reading Leibniz that we ourselves are making exclamations, so that, concerning our goal this year, we derive a modest goal from this: to be able to discover, even when Leibniz does not provide us with the expression… There would be two cases: the cases in which Leibniz gives us the explicit expression, and then the other cases where we feel the need, to justify the need, to translate into an expression something that Leibniz does not directly provide us. But our task would be to accumulate the expressions of principles, that is, the great exclamatory expressions that cut through Leibniz’s philosophy. So this means that I could assign these expressions for each class, each of our meetings, the goal or the focus being to establish two, three or four of these. At the end of the year, if all goes well, we would have about a hundred, or if things go even better, two hundred exclamatory expressions, that crisscross Leibniz’s philosophy, and that we would learn by heart, and would write up in the final meeting.
But why is there this proliferation of principles? Could we consider a hypothesis? Why can Leibniz’s philosophy be presented as a proliferation of principles and derivatives of principles, axioms, laws, etc.? I believe that our previous meeting gave us a hypothesis on this point. Is it perhaps because he causes the principles to play into the infinite? But what does that mean? If this is right, ah well, we have to say: Leibniz causes the principle of identity to play into the infinite? But what could that meaning, placing the principle of identity in play into the infinite?  Once again, the principle of identity is A is A, the thing is what it is. What could this operation be that carries identity into the infinite, and the same for the other principles? But it’s perhaps the milieu of infinity that assures this proliferation of principles. I have no reason to answer more precisely since this it the goal of our entire year. To see in what sense… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
But why is there an introduction into the infinite? This is where I would like to return to certain things discussed in the last meeting. And indeed, we saw why this presence of infinity at all levels of Leibniz’s thought or philosophy. Besides, it’s precisely for this reason, the presence of the infinite, which we had as a second hypothesis about Leibniz’s philosophy: that it was perhaps the very manner of a Baroque philosophy. [Pause] It’s the very manner of Baroque philosophy or, if you prefer, what does the manner of Baroque philosophy mean? What is the Baroque? The last time, we refused to look for an essence of the Baroque to the extent that such an essence was consisted of discussions and disputes, both useless and without interest, fine, [and consisted] of knowing what were the Baroque eras, what were the Baroque genres, etc. And we preferred taking a purely operative viewpoint (point de vue opératoire), telling ourselves that whatever the Baroque might be, what interests us is: what does it create? What does it create that no other form of agency (instance) would make? How does one recognize the Baroque?[1]
Our first response was that it’s quite simple. It’s an operation consisting of creating folds, of folding. Folding is what the Baroque operation is. Under what conditions? Is every fold Baroque ? No, there are folds that don’t have these details. But I would say that the Baroque is the fold when the fold goes to infinity. The fold going to infinity — [Pause; interruption] That’s it, you really shouldn’t press your back on the light switch [Laughter] — The fold going to infinity is the Baroque operation par excellence. We saw this the last time. And henceforth, if I said that the fold goes to infinity and that this is what defines the Baroque operation, I already couldn’t stop myself, and so much the better. It’s the sign that such performance was good. Why? Because immediately a doubling of the fold occurred. The fold going to infinity doubled into two directions: the pleats of matter and the folds in the soul. And the pleats of matter go to infinity just as the folds in the soul go to infinity, such that two texts by Leibniz seemed fundamental to us: a particularly clear text taken from Système nouveau de la nature [New System of Nature]. What does he tell us? [Deleuze looks in his copy] He tells us, “The organs,” the organs of a body, “are differently folded, and or more or less developed”; the organs are differently folded, and or more or less developed.[2] And on the other hand, [there is] the text from the Monadology, paragraph 61, in which he tells us, “The soul could not develop suddenly all its pleats for they go in to infinity.” Thus, the pleats of matter and folds in the soul, these are the two forms of the fold.
Why does the fold have two forms? This is what is already important, but we can only proceed little by little. At least we recognize a fundamental characteristic of the Baroque, a fundamental characteristic of the Baroque according to Wölfflin and of Baroque architecture, which is the distinction of two floors. Everything occurs as if there were a lower floor and an upper floor. If you will, this corresponds to a drawing of …, very schematically… [Deleuze goes to the board and draws] of the Baroque church, and we saw this the last time. There is a lower floor, in which in some ways the mass is enlarged, and there’s the floor above.[3] What is this duality? We could say that it’s one of matter and movement. However, there is movement in both cases, but on the lower floor, the movement is related to resistance, and on the upper floor, the movement is related to its own spontaneity. We could also say that it’s the body and soul, or indeed we could say that the lower floor is the Composite, and the upper floor is the Simple.
For us, the lower floor is that of the pleats of matter that go on to infinity, and the upper floor is that of the folds in the soul that equally go on to infinity. What does this mean? If on the lower floor there are infinite pleats of matter, if above there are infinite folds in the soul – you notice, I am trying not to comment on my small difference, the “of” in pleats of matter, and the folds in the soul. Why? Because I am going to discuss it later but notice nonetheless that the two expressions are not symmetrical. In any case, if my two Baroque floors are distributed in this way – [Heinrich] Wölfflin will say mass and movement – I can say that yes, everything is – and that’s the Baroque signature – everything is a labyrinth.[4] The pleats in matter [sic] constitute a labyrinth, and the folds in the soul constitute another labyrinth. The infinity of the fold is decomposed into two labyrinths.
And still it is necessary that this be true, literally; ah yes. It is so true that Leibniz works through a Baroque philosophy or a Baroque conversion of philosophy. Everyone knows the importance of the labyrinth in Baroque architecture and Baroque thought. Well it is so true that Leibniz presents the entirety of philosophy under the auspices of two labyrinths. And there he calls it… And these two labyrinths no doubt have rapports of resonance or correspondence, of fundamental redoublings one by the other. And to these two labyrinths, Leibniz gives them a name, the lower labyrinth and the upper labyrinth. For the lower one, he doesn’t call it the “labyrinth downstairs”, he calls it the labyrinth of the continuous. For us, this is of enormous interest, even just this expression, one that we have to take literally, the labyrinth of the continuous. That means that the problem of the continuous cannot be adequately posed on the level of the straight line. That’s what he found, and it’s already a very great discovery. For example, in Descartes, continuity is posed on the level of the straight line. If Leibniz tells us that there is a labyrinth of the continuous, this means the problem of the continuous cannot be settled on the level of the straight line. Ah, but you realize, [with] such a proposition, what does it mean, that continuity is not settled on the level of the straight line? We are just taking notes at the moment; we are acquiring things. I don’t know what this means yet; we cannot know. It’s the labyrinth of the continuous: you understand that it’s the state of matter insofar as it doesn’t cease pleating and unfolding to infinity, insofar as matter admits an infinity of pleats. So there is a labyrinth of the continuous.
The other labyrinth, the labyrinth upstairs, is called the labyrinth of liberty. We see in fact here that it concerns the soul. And why he reproaches Descartes is for having understood neither one nor the other of two labyrinths. A particularly clear text in this regard about the two labyrinths is in a small work, On Liberty. I will read very quickly: “There are indeed two labyrinths. One concerns the composition of the continuous, the second [concerns] the nature of freedom. They find their source in this same infinity.” We cannot say it better. The infinite doubles over into two labyrinths, the labyrinth of the pleats of matter or composition of the continuous, [and] the labyrinth of freedom of the spirit, the freedom of the soul, or the infinite folds of the soul.
And this same distinguished philosopher, this remarkable philosopher that I mentioned above, notably Descartes, not being able to decide either one way or the other, or not wanting to reveal his opinion – and this is quite treacherous! – preferred to cut through this with a blade. In other words, Descartes never understood anything about the labyrinths. Sometimes he considered a straight line and believed that the continuous was on this side, at that moment. Considering the continuous on the level of the simple straight line, he confused the continuous with an infinite divisibility of matter, that is, the indefinite. If he had understood that it wasn’t on the level of the straight line that the continuous is situated, he would have seen that the continuous can be resolved or can be composed only on the level of infinitely or actually divided matter. This is precisely all the pleats of matter.
And sometimes for freedom, this time without doubt he did not consider a straight line, but he equally missed the labyrinth because he only held onto two opposite points, the two points that make up a straight line’s segment, points that determine a segment of a straight line, specifically one pole, God’s prescience, and the other pole, man’s freedom. And he said that we could not understand how the two were reconciled, but it was necessary to reconcile them. In other words, on the level of the continuous, he only held onto the straight line, and at the level of liberty, he only grasped both ends of the line. In other words, for the labyrinth of liberty, he maintained only the entry and the exit. So it’s catastrophic in a labyrinth only to maintain the entry and the exit, [Laughter] since with this only, the entry and the exit, there would be no labyrinth. The labyrinth is what’s between the two, that is, the infinity of folds.
So this text is very important for us, one that I did not quote in the previous class, and that determined our entire plan, in the beginning. We are still involved in an introduction to Leibniz’s philosophy. The plan that we settled on was, first, the examination of the lower floor or the pleats of matter, and secondly, the examination of the upper floor, or the folds in the soul, with the condition that there be a sufficient reason forcing us to pass from the lower floor to the upper floor. Because after all, why wouldn’t the lower floor be enough? Why does… Since already on the lower floor, the floor of matter, the fold is already going to infinity, why must this lower floor be joined to another floor that concerns the folds in the soul? Why wouldn’t the lower floor suffice? You understand?
Hence, I have very rapidly summarized since this is what we did at the last meeting. I summarized as quickly as possible what we’ve acquired concerning the lower floor since we will need this the entire year. That is, those who will be in our meetings will have to have the gift of recall because each time, we have to hold on to what we have acquired.
And I am saying that the lower floor is defined by this: corresponding to the definition Wölfflin offered of the Baroque,[5] [it’s] treatment of matter in bulk [en masse]. That’s deeply what the Baroque is, not only a manner of treating, its one of the characteristics of the Baroque. First characteristic: treatment of matter in bulk.
Second characteristic: a tendency of matter to overflow its frame or its space. This is also very well detailed by Wölfflin on the level of Baroque architecture.
So good, I am doing what I announced. This is where I find my first exclamatory phrase, my first exclamatory proposition, the grand expression 1: In bodies, there is something more than extension [l’étendue]. In matter, there is something more than extension, exclamation point! We could say it in Latin; this is something quite lovely! It’s a constant theme in Leibniz; he constantly says that. I say: let this be our exclamation. We’ve got one. In fact, if matter overflows its frame or its space, there is something more in matter than the extension it occupies.
Third characteristic, and I would like you to sense that these are linked. There again, Wölfflin indicated it very well on the level of Baroque architecture in general: tendency toward rounding off angles. Why? Because the masses in which matter is decomposed are essentially soft and, at the limit, fluid. [There’s] a tendency toward fluidity in matter as is evident in the treatment of waters in the Baroque. We saw this already, the whole system of fountains, falls, etc. I won’t go back over this.
Fourth characteristic: If mass is essentially soft and, at the limit, fluid, the physics of the body must be a physics of the elastic body, elasticity being what? [It’s] the measure of the degree of fluidity of the body, and hence Leibniz’s famous formula, MV2 [squared], which is concerned in the communication of movement – this isn’t MV, it’s MV2. V2 imposes the viewpoint of acceleration, that is, of the demand of small solicitations on movement, the demand of degrees or of what he calls the conatus, which implies the assimilation of the body in movement to an elastic body. The Leibnizian model… The model of Leibnizian physics will the spring (le ressort). And in the last class, we saw how this physics of the elastic body produced a great substitution in the atom relation as hard body on the oblique straight line – the descent of the atom following an oblique straight line – as trajectory. Leibniz’s physics substitute for this an elastic body, that is, there is no atom. There is no atom because there is no perfectly hard body. Elastic body on a curvilinear trajectory, this is what already is a first means of rounding off angles according to Wölfflin’s expression.
Fifth characteristic: [It’s] the natural history of the organic body. The organic body is more than an elastic body. It is endowed with a capacity to fold itself to infinity and henceforth to unfold itself, from which we get expression two: All organisms [are] in a primary organism; all flies [are] in the first fly. All fly eggs [are] in the first fly egg. And the organic body is going to be traversed by movements that we can call as well – here, you recognize words that were current in the seventeenth century – envelopment-development. The organism envelops its parts to infinity, and its parts are developed. Envelopment-development, or what comes down to the same, involution-evolution; or what also comes down to the same, implication-explication. To implicate is to envelop; to explicate is to develop, such that Leibniz can say that we are never separated from our body, or from a body, in any case. And when we die, it is simply our organic parts that are enveloped to infinity, that is, become infinitely small, but our soul is never separated from a body. To die is to involve; death is the involution of the body.
Hence we get the idea, and this is the second grand exclamatory expression – so now we have two already: Yes, the organism is a machine, but the machine is infinitely machined! The machine is infinitely machined: that meant [that] all the parts of the machine are still machines such that the machine can fold itself to infinity. All the machine’s parts are still machines such that we must say, yes, the organic body, yes, the organic body is machinic. It’s a machine. And in one sense, Descartes was right to say “animal machines”. At the same time, Descartes understood nothing. He understood nothing because – this is Leibniz speaking – because he did not see that there is a difference in nature between machine and mechanism. A mechanism, insofar as it is created by man, is a finite machine, that is, it’s a machine in which the pieces are not machines going to infinity. A mechanism is a finite machine. An organism, yes, it’s a machine, but a machine irreducible to any mechanism. Why? Because it’s an infinite machine. It’s a machine in which all the pieces are machines, that is, it’s a machine that pleats itself to infinity. [Pause]
Finally, the sixth characteristic: natural history, no longer only of the organism, of the organic body, but of the living. Why? Because what explains the organism? What explains the organism’s capacity to fold to infinity its own parts and to unfold them? Leibniz’s answer will be: it’s the diffuse presence, in organic matter, the diffuse presence of simple animals, of animalcules, what he sometimes calls spermatic animals. A diffuse presence in organic matter of simple animals, that is, there is always an infinity of simple animals in any portion of inorganic matter, however small that it may be. And he calls upon the microscope that shows the presence of such animalcules everywhere. And it’s true, he tells us, you recall, in some very beautiful texts, entirely admirable. It’s true! It’s true! It’s true for the block of marble no less than for the fish pond. Just as in the pond full of fish, where there are fish to infinity, so too in the block of marble, there are animalcules to infinity. There are simple animalcules to infinity. Why? Because the block of marble seems hard, but no body is absolutely hard. That is, the block of marble is no less fluid, within certain degrees, than the pond. If all bodies are elastic and fluid, the block of marble also responds to this physical nature of the body. There are no fewer simple animals in a portion of marble, however small the portion may be, than there are in a pond. So there are, if you will… He does not say simply [that] the organism includes an infinity of parts that fold themselves in and unfold themselves. He says [that] in inorganic matter, however small it might be, there is an infinity of simple animals.
From this comes the third exclamatory expression, that we saw in the first class, that is one of Leibniz’s most beautiful: certainly, everything is not fish, but there are fish everywhere.[6] In other words, Leibniz’s vitalism is a pluri-vitalism. It’s a very special vitalism since, literally, I could transform my third expression into another, equally exclamatory: matter is not lively [vivante], but matter is a life pool [un vivier]. All matter is a life pool. Everything is not a fish, but there are fish everywhere, a kind of nautical ballet. And what is the nautical ballet? It’s a very important element of the Baroque. Everything is fluid, and the dance of the living in the fluid… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
There, I have summed up. You see, if you grasp this all together, it’s a commentary on matter that is organized in bulk, the masses that are soft and fluid by nature, the elastic body as model for the body and physics, elastic bodies on curves, that is, the elements of folding, the pleats of the organism, and finally the folds of matter around simple animals. Thus, since there is an infinity of simple animals in any portion of matter, the folds of matter, the pleats of matter go to infinity; all that turns around the same idea, notably: it’s the pleats of matter that constitute the first [ground] floor of Baroque architecture. [Pause] Henceforth, I would say [that] what is this whole floor? [It’s] a logic of masses, a logic of soft, elastic or fluid masses, Leibniz’s radical opposition to the atom, the hard body. There are no hard bodies in nature. Once again, everything is a life pool. [It’s] a logic of masses or aggregates; in other words, a logic of composites, the composite being infinitely composed. Infinite composition of matter, the infinite composition of matter is therefore the pleats.
Fine, and from this the question explodes… We are quite fine on this floor. All is composed, all is composed to infinity. This is a possible position. We are on the first floor, the lower floor. Fine, all is good there, all is fine. We are even cozy and warm in the pleats of matter. At the extreme, we are simple animals around which matter makes an infinity of pleats. We are fish in the pond, all good. What could be better? Obviously. And what is God in all this? God is the great guardian of the life pool. It decides where and at what moment a fish folds back up, that is, dies, provided that this fish might unfold. All this is such a satisfying, admirable world.
So why are we forced to connect a second floor to this, or rather the first (upper) floor ? Why are we forced to join it to an upper floor? – And it’s here that at our last meeting, I was really obscure on this, that is, confused, because we were already tired from all this. But now, this will become quite simple. In the meantime, we have gotten strong and refreshed, you as well as me. – My answer is that there are two reasons, the first being, natural history, and a reason related to pure physics, that are going to show us that, in fact, when we propose a lower floor with infinite folds of matter, well then, one has to connect to it another floor, and not at all another floor where everything would be unfolded. On the contrary, one must overlay these pleats of matter with another type of fold. Why?
The first reason, I maintain, is because of natural history. In fact, we saw that organic matter, in its capacity of folding, unfolding to infinity, its own parts which are themselves composed to infinity, implied a position of simple animals in matter, and diffused in inorganic matter. In other words, in scholarly terms borrowed from natural history, I would say: Ovism — that is, the envelopment of all the eggs in the egg of a given species, the envelopment of all flies in a first fly, all that – ovism is overcome by animalculism, that is, by the idea that organic matter has this capacity of folding itself and unfolding itself to infinity only because there is an infinite diffusion of simple animals in inorganic matter.
But here I find that I am drawn to call upon the Simples. And you already sense Leibniz’s grand idea: the Composites imply the Simples. It’s true, it’s true. The Composites imply the Simples. Only, only, only, well there we are, [Various sounds of tape changes in the recorders] only, as composition goes toward infinity. … [End of tape; the break arrives towards the end of discussion of the “first reason,” and picks up toward the start of discussion of the “second reason”, already in progress] [46:37]
 
Part 2
. . . [First proposition] If a body or a point – it’s there, the text that I read to you [in the 28 October meeting], so obscure, from the answer given to [Pierre] Bayle – Leibniz tells us, if a body or a point were alone in the world, it would follow the tangent. In its movement, it would follow the tangent, that is, it would follow a straight line. Second proposition: the fact is that the body does not follow a straight line. The elastic body follows a curve or an element of a curve. Third proposition: why? We will say that it’s precisely because it is not alone. If it were alone, it would follow a tangent, fine. But it follows the curve, and this is because it’s not alone. In other words, this is the action of converging bodies; it’s the action of ambient bodies on it that imposes the curvature of its trajectory. [Pause] Thus, the curve followed by the elastic body would be encompassed by the action of bodies converging on the body considered.
New proposition [4]: But that isn’t enough, because just consider: If the curvature of the trajectory of the elastic body. … Leibniz offers a simple example; for example, you toss a stone into the air. It goes up, you see – it is a good example of the elastic body, of the spring-loaded body (corps à resort); what he means by “all bodies are elastic” is very simple – it goes up and passes through all the degrees, that he will call degrees of lateness (tardivité). And then it redescends and passes through a completion of all the degrees of speed. It de-accelerates and it re-accelerates. This is the very case of curved movement of a body called elastic, of a spring-loaded body. It’s really an elastic model, in contrast to a model from atomic physics.
So, I think this: if you say that the elastic body follows a curve because the bodies around it exert their action on it and turn it away from the tangent, you are perhaps explaining it all, but by assuming that normal movement would be rectilinear. In fact, exterior bodies can only exert an external causality on the body considered. Henceforth, you say that it is turned from the tangent by the action of exterior bodies. Fine. That suffices to show that you are not taking account of the elastic essence of the body, for from the point of view of the elastic body, the curve is not a turning away from the tangent; it’s not a detoured tangent. The curve is primary in relation to any rectilinear element. In other words, there must be spontaneity of the curve, [Pause] and without the spontaneity of the curve, the causality of exterior bodies would not be exerted. A spontaneity of the curve is required to account for this: that the curve is not a derivative of the tangent. [Pause]
What is this spontaneity? You will obviously no longer find it, and you will not find it in the physical point or in the elastic body. What is necessary? We cannot escape this. Another point is necessary, hence the obscurity of Leibniz’s text as when he tells us, “and the physical point is only the point of view of this other point.” It’s a thing that we are for the moment unable to understand or comment on, but we have to find it, and perhaps we will find it today to the extent that we will be equipped for commentary: this idea that, henceforth, the point on the curve is only the point of view of another point, one that is endowed with spontaneity, that is, whose curvature expresses spontaneity.
There you are. I am saying it is quite simple: on the level of natural history, [it’s] the necessary reference to simple animals; on the level of physics of the elastic body, [it’s] the necessary reference to a spontaneity of the curve, [and] both [references] precisely require another floor. The pleats of matter cannot explain… constitute the composition to infinity; they cannot explain the Simple. In other words, the Simple is on the upper floor. How can we avoid a paradox? But there is no reason to avoid one. The Composite is not composed of Simples since it is composed to infinity. In other words, the composite is not simplified. And how to avoid the reciprocal? The Simples are not composed. A floor of Composites to infinity, that is, the Composites that are not simplified, these are the masses. A floor of Simples is not composed.
So fine, the Composites are not simplified; the Simples are not composed. Each is on its own floor. What is going to occur? This is at the start of the Monadology, paragraphs 2 and 3. [Paragraph 2] “There must be simple substances, because there are composites. A composite thing is just a collection of simple ones that happen to have come together,” there you are: There must be simple substances, because there are composites. A composite thing is just a collection of simple ones that happen to have come together. [Paragraph 3] “Something that has no parts,” that is, where it is simple, “can’t be extended, can’t have a shape, and can’t be split up.” In other words, yes, the Composite refers to something simple provided that the Simple does not exist on the same level, on the same floor as the Composite. The Simple is no more composed than the Composite is simplified. Each on its own floor, what is going to occur? The Composites’s floor and the Simples’s floor: between the two floor, a fold is required. A fold is needed… So, this gets complicated, but we have no choice. It is necessary that a fold separate and bring each of them together, the pleats of matter and the folds in the soul. [Pause] It is necessary that a fold separate and bring each of them together, floor one and floor two. [Pause] Everything is folded, everything is fold, everything is… and no doubt it’s the fold that separates the two floors and no doubt distributes it onto each of the two floors. [Pause]
So this becomes really beautiful. Why? Because this leads us quickly into a question that will complete this first [part of the] study. We tell ourselves, after all, and yes, we have the impression that something there, thanks to Leibniz, something appears to us perhaps concerning philosophy in general. Since… well, what? Either philosophy [is there], or else would it have to be poetry as well? What does that mean? The fold. Each of us believes to know that a recent great philosopher made the fold the armature of his philosophy: Heidegger,[7] and Heidegger never stopped saying that we understand nothing of what I call “being” and what I call “the be-er” (l’étant) – this time, not Leibniz’s “be-er” (étant), not the pond (étang), [Laughter, at the pun] but the “be-er”, that which is – we understand nothing of what I call “being” and “be-er” if we do not see that the essential is the fold that refers them to one another. And it refers them to one another as what? No doubt as the ontology of being and as the phenomenology of “be-er”, being as being of the “be-er”, the “be-er” as “be-er” of being. The “of” is the fold.
And picking up these Heideggerian themes, Merleau-Pointy speaks to us of the fold that constitutes vertical being, the fold that constitutes vertical being. You see, it’s not complicated. I am doing this. [Deleuze folds a sheet of paper] I am doing philosophy when I do this, [Pause] the vertical being, here it’s the “be-er”. I have folded my sheet, “be-er” and being, vertical being; good, you will say fine, the fold, perhaps it’s something that… Only, here we are, we cannot stop; we don’t want to stop. We do not stop the fold. For the fold, we are bringing in Heidegger and all that. What I am saying is that in Heidegger, he underwent a very deep experience that we do not stop the fold. That is, the fold swarms in all directions since, on the side of being, what is the double movement, the complementary dual dynamism, of veiling-unveiling? So I am saying some extremely rudimentary things. On the side of ontology, it’s this complementarity, this co-penetration of veiling and unveiling, in which we have to take the word “veil” with Heidegger’s requirements, that is, in an extremely effective sense of etymology. The veil, really, the veil as substance, the substance of the veil… veil oneself, unveiling, veiling… What is this precisely if not the fold? This time, it’s no longer the fold of being and of the “be-er”, but a kind of repercussion of the fold of being and of the “be-er” in being itself.
And what is the status of the “be-er”? How does the “be-er” constitute the world. It constitutes the world in a phenomenological form, which is what? Which is – and this is well know, coming straight from Husserl – the envelopment of profiles, such that the fold of being and of the “be-er” doubles over into being under the form of folds of the veil and into the “be-er” under the form of the envelopment of profiles. I am telling myself that it’s not at random that Merleau-Ponty draws on Leibniz in his notes. He says that the only one who understood something before Heidegger, certainly, the only one who understood something was Leibniz. It’s strange. And in the end, this tale of the fold… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence] because we are too ignorant. I don’t mean at all that we shouldn’t praise Heidegger, since it goes without saying that Heidegger conceived of the fold in a deeply original way. But I believe that we can say that a discovery by Heidegger was the very position of the fold as operating the most fundamental relationship between being and the “be-er”, or if you prefer, of the two floors.
I think that in a certain way, it’s a philosophical-poetic idea running through [this]. Poetry has always started from the idea that there is no straight line in the world, that bodies were rubbery or cavernous, that everything is labyrinthine, and what does that mean? Last year [during the Foucault seminar, possibly 18 March 1986], we saw this a bit here and there, and it’s not the Heideggerians. [Henri] Michaux … Some among you pointed out to me a very heavy text by Michaux. It’s very recent in Michaux, a very lovely collection by Michaux called Life in Folds. And this theme from Michaux, owing nothing to Heidegger, consists in explaining in a no doubt splendid poem that we are born with twenty-two folds – it’s a Chinese figure, twenty-two, surely; it’s a figure loaded with… eh? No? [Sound of students answering] It’s certainly a figure linked to the folds of water-lilies (nénuphars), something like that – we are born with twenty-two folds and, Michaux says, when we have undone all our folds, we die. But to console us, he adds, it happens that we die before having undone all our folds. [Laughter] What does that mean? It’s what we call a premature death. We must say that he didn’t do enough philosophy; he didn’t undo all his folds. Only the misunderstanding – and if one does enough philosophy, one knows this is how it is – [is] that the unfolding isn’t the opposite of the fold. And moreover, the unfolding is only the conduit corresponding to the fold.
And it’s not only Michaux. I am mixing up everything; it’s in order to show the extreme variety of this thought. One of you pointed out to me the extent to which this theme is quite profound in [Stéphane] Mallarmé. The theme of the fold appears in a constant dual form in Mallarmé, and it’s infinitely more important, it seems to me, than the theme of silence. Moreover, silence is… We cannot understand silence according to Mallarmé if we do not take account of the fold. And the fold is double in Mallarmé. It’s the fold of lace work, I would say; it’s the fold as phenomenological. There is always the fold of lace work. And then, it’s the fold of the book; that is the ontological fold. And the two never cease referring to each other, and there is a beautiful phrase in Mallarmé:[8] “This pleat of somber lace which retains the infinite woven by a thousand,” we couldn’t say it any better, the fold goes all the way to infinity; the fold is what goes to infinity. “This pleat of somber lace which retains the infinite woven by a thousand, each according to the thread or the prolongation, its secret unknown” – if I understand correctly, this is the ablative absolute – “each according to the thread or the prolongation, its secret unknown, assembles distant interlacings where there sleeps some luxury to take account of – a ghoul, a knot, some foliage – and to present.”[9] In my opinion, this is very beautiful; it says everything. At the same time it says that the fold of somber lace work goes beyond toward another, deeper fold, and the folds, all the folds, all the way to infinity. …
Such that, on this level, we again find… We see here exactly where I am. I ask that you grant me the lower floor consisting of this: matter is inseparable from pleats, and the pleats of matters go all the way to infinity, physically, organically, or inorganically. [Pause] But there is a reason for which the folds of matter are not enough. There are reasons for which the folds of matter are not enough and refer us to the folds in the soul. The labyrinth of the continuous refers us to the labyrinth of freedom. Between the two labyrinths, each infinitely folded on itself, there is a fold. [Pause; sound of Deleuze turning pages]
Good. The second part [of the class] the other floor, the upper floor, and I sum up, to come back to it this way. We will have run back through, I assume, I hope, in a new way, in a slightly different way, we will have run back through all that we did the last time, but also moving forward on certain points. I remind you that we began the study of the upper floor, in what form? Well, we just left the material side, I would say, the material data or the physical data. What is this? It’s the elastic body on such an irregular curve as possible, the elastic body on an irregular curve. Why irregular? Since the pressure of coexisting bodies varies itself with the variations in the neighborhood. Thus, on the other floor, that is not what we are going to find. On the other floor, we are going to find the ideal genetic element of a material given, that is, of the elastic body on its curve. What is the ideal genetic element? This is what is going to furnish the first [upper] floor. You see the difference? On the lower floor, I have the elastic body on a curve; on the upper floor, I ask, what is the genetic element of this materiality of the elastic body on a curve? And our answer, we saw it: this time, it’s the point, pure point, let’s say, the mathematical point.
But I have hardly said this than problems arise. So we would need to look at this problem then or we will never move forward. But I tell myself that I have one very interesting thing, the theory of points in Leibniz since there are all sorts of points. We saw on the lower floor the physical point. The physical point is a rubbery point, an elastic point. And then, on the first [upper] floor, we encounter an entirely different point, no longer the physical point. It’s the mathematical point, the point as mathematical point. There we have the ideal generic element. On what? As we saw, on an inflection. And you recall the figure of the inflection – I’ve lost my chalk, where is it ? Oh, here! – [Deleuze goes to the board] Here we have an indubitable figure of inflection; it’s the genetic element, a mathematical point on inflection, with the inflection being defined how? By a singularity, a cherished expression in mathematics, specifically, the point of inflection, the point of inflection being defined by a singularity, by this: [Deleuze indicates the drawing] it’s an intrinsic singularity, that is, independent of a system of coordinates; an intrinsic singularity consisting in what? Well, the tangent to the point of inflection crosses the curve, crosses the inflection.
And how elated we were in the last class to discover [that] this ideal genetic element, the mathematical point on the inflection, was the figure that Paul Klee named the “active line,” of which he undertook the genesis of everything he called forms in movement. And the active line, that is, the point on the inflection, from Paul Klee seemed to authorize for me every connection between Klee and the Baroque, a connection supported by Paul Klee himself, and allowed us to judge the opposition [of] Klee [and] Kandinsky, in which, to a certain extent, if I dare say, Kandinsky remains in some ways Cartesian, that is, he considers that the point is not spontaneously in movement, and that what is required is an exercise of exterior force to put the point in movement, and the henceforth, this movement is angular, that is, is first rectilinear, horizontal or vertical, but following the oblique. Thus, to Paul Klee’s active line that demands spontaneity of movement, notably the mathematical point on the inflection, is opposed in fact Kandinsky’s angular line. There is no basis for establishing a hierarchy, but there is a basis to establish a divergence in this, a difference in inspiration. And yet again, it’s very important for us that Klee constantly refers to the Baroque themes. So, if this is how it is, [Deleuze goes to the board], the ideal genetic element, the mathematical point that runs through an inflection, you see? [He draws on the board] There, I would say that this is the ideal fold, or idea-al, [a play on the word “idea” in ideal], or at least that’s what I call the genetic element of the fold. The inflection is the genetic element of the fold. In other words, the genetic element of pleats of matter is the inflections traversed by mathematical points.
But what can we draw from an inflection? Well precisely, it’s a genetic element because lots of things can be drawn from it. And I was telling you, according to a young philosopher who has undertaken some very astonishing work, there is an entire variation of the genesis of forms, what Klee called forms in movement. So, according to Bernard Cache,[10] we saw that last time that, starting from the inflexion, there emerges an engendering of forms through symmetry – I won’t go back over this, I am only summarizing – through symmetry, through prolonging curvature – you remember? – the Baroque theme. The ogive was a transformation through symmetry, through prolonging the curvature, through rotations, which gave us the starfish figure, through octagonal sliding – that yielded a kind of unhooking – [Deleuze returns to the board, then sits down] through rupture or, if you prefer – but this is too complicated, but that doesn’t matter – through oblique cuts, with the very question that I am quickly posing here – but this is of little interest; these are hypotheses; you can create geneses yourself of families of curves or families of forms: isn’t there a passage, a point of view from one genetic method of inflection, if one proceeds or goes all the way to the oblique cut here [Deleuze traces on the board] that develops an effect of rupture in the inflection? Don’t we arrive at a genesis of the hyperbole? See, the hyperbole is a very special figure. It’s this curve constituted from two pieces with one going downward and the other upward, and with one getting infinitely closer to one of the two axes without ever reaching it, and the other approaching the other axis, with a kind of gap in the middle, that is, at the intersection of both axes that is represented by zero, for one simple reason: that there is no division possible by zero. So, we would go all the way to the genesis of the hyperbole. Fine.
Immediately, if I am proposing to you this engendering, according to Bernard Cache, that connects immediately to the idea of a possible conjuncture with something known and greatly discussed today, with catastrophe theories by [René] Thom.[11] Thom’s catastrophe theory proposes for us an interesting genesis, so is there something troubling in it? It’s just that in all Thom’s books, you find a drawing; I am going to show it to you from afar because it is quite lovely, this drawing, but finally, we won’t comment on it because we’d get… You wouldn’t see anything, but it’s just to say that it’s beautiful. And on this situation of catastrophes, I am reading…. What’s bothersome is a small weakness, that can always be corrected… It’s just that he doesn’t speak about the fold. He provides a minimum of simples that are the straight line. But secondly, in this genesis, this catastrophic genesis, what is the second, that is, the true genetic element? I swear that I am not twisting this: it’s what he calls “the fold”. It’s written down, ok? [Laughter] “The fold.” And then, from the fold, he is going to derive – I am offering this just to inspire curiosity in some of you; you can take it or leave it, or just take what suits you – the genesis then yields the pucker or gather (la fronce) – this is kind of like something from Mallarmé – the fold yields the pucker or gather. After the gather comes the dovetail (queue d’aronde) which is an extremely interesting form. After the dovetail comes the butterfly; after that, the hyperbolic umbilical, the hyperbole; then, the elliptical umbilical; then, the parabolic umbilical – hyperbole, ellipsis, parabola. So hold on to this because we will certainly encounter this theme in Leibniz.
Fine. All that I am saying is that you might see in what way I can say that the ideal genetic element is the mathematical point on an inflection, on any inflection whatsoever, and from this genetic element are derived all kinds of forms in movement. But, but, but, but – consider the consequence that seems to me enormous: it’s that we are tending toward a radical revision of the status of the notion of object. It’s a genesis of the object. Well, the object is going to emerge by taking on a form that it has never had in philosophy, and we must give all glory to Leibniz for having done so. In other words, what does the object become? It becomes entirely mobile insofar as it describes a series of inflections. In other words, the object is affected by a fundamental curvature, entirely mobile insofar as it describes a series of inflections. Why do I say a series of inflections? Well the series of inflections is all the figures that result from the primitive inflection, that result through symmetry, through prolonging, rotation, the oblique cut, etc. In other words, it’s the mobile form insofar as it describes a family of curves. That’s what the object is.
The object is the mobile form or point insofar as it describes a family of curves, but what constitutes a family of curves? It’s precisely the parameters that frame these curves, and the possibility of passing from one of these curves to the other through an operation that is always an operation of fold. What are these parameters? The parameters defining the curves, well, these are relations of proportion, intervals. You have seen this; for example, typically, I marked the formation of an interval starting from that inflection, [Deleuze points to the board] whatever you like. So, the object is inseparable from the movement through which it describes a family of curves. That’s the object’s constitutive curve. In other words, however, Leibniz invents lots of words, but here, he didn’t need to invent a word. It’s odd, but we can substitute for him. So we are saying that there is not an object. What is necessary? The object in Leibniz’s work is an objectile, as one might say projectile.[12] [Laughter] Well, it’s not really that funny; it’s necessary, you understand? A somewhat bizarre word is needed to take account of this, that he creates a strange conception out of the object…. Fine. [Pause] That’s the first point. I organize it under the headings: genetic values of inflection and engendering of forms.
A second, much more delicate points remain, and here I need all of your patience. I don’t make mathematical allusions very often because I read it in a very rudimentary and imprecise way, so it’s not that important. But today, I need certain things from mathematics since the second point on this upper floor would be: how is the inflection, you see, about which I can say that in itself, as genetic element, how is it an inflection with variable curvature, and not an inflection with constant curvature? It’s an inflection with variable curvature. Perhaps if you sense a bit what Leibniz is in the process of showing in the concept of spontaneity, it’s that spontaneity is already the active line, as Paul Klee said, and [Leibniz] will say the spontaneous line. You see, we had to go beyond the collaboration of the body, the action of bodies on a body, going toward an idea of spontaneity, inflection as spontaneity of the mobile form or the mathematical point.
What I would like to show is how the inflection with variable curvature, such as it is suitable to define it, is inseparable and can only be thought in relation with infinite series. Understand that it’s very important to see the logical progression of our work. By defining inflection on the first [upper] floor, I am giving myself the ideal fold, the fold from above. And now, I have to prove that the fold from above no less than the pleats down below, that the fold up above goes to infinity. I would have shown, if I mange to do so, something that isn’t easy: that the curvature of the fold, inflection, necessarily results in the infinite series. Eh? If we manage to show this, that would be perfect, unexpected, that is, you will be very pleased. [Pause] So there we are… It’s hot here, we’re dying… So, my question is…. Are there any questions? They need to be crystal clear… Yes?
A student: [Inaudible question]
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, I am going to tell you: if the semi-circle doesn’t turn all alone, that’s because it’s a semi-circle, that is, a constant curve. On the other hand, if you take a curve with variable curvature, its path will expedite a mode of spontaneity. Why? In one sense, this is quite good because it places us exactly where we need to be because there will be an infinite series and the relation of inflection to the infinite series is going to be an expression of spontaneity. But the circle is a finite figure; there is no infinite series to draw from it except in something the circle possesses. But the circle itself is a figure with constant curvature; there is no reason to seek the slightest spontaneity there. So there’s no problem. Never… It’s not… Leibniz would say, but mathematics of the circle, geometry of the circle is worth absolutely no more than the geometry of the straight line. All that is the same. It’s Cartesian geometry.
There’s a great physicist-mathematician-astronomer, whatever you like, that introduced the direct study of curvatures into mathematics, named [Christiaan] Huygens. His relations to the Baroque are fundamental. Huygens’s physics is really Baroque physics. And, I will limit myself to one very simple criterion for why it’s Baroque. As all the manuals of physics say, it’s Huygens who introduced curvatures into physics, [Pause; sounds of cassettes being changed] and as a function of the study of curvatures, this introduces infinite series. And in the case of figures of the circle type, a kind of curve with constant curvature, they are expressible finally through proportions in a straight line, still leaving us to see if there isn’t something in the circle that goes precisely beyond… In this case, there is no basis for seeking spontaneity. You can only find spontaneity starting from the active line and what it offers. In the end, this is what I am going to try to explain.
Do you want to take a little break? But please, no smoking, ok? … You can go outside to smoke… Yes?
A student: [Inaudible question on the theory of points, almost inaudible except at the end]: Perhaps the substantial points of life, of monadic substance, in Leibniz, can be called metaphysical points.
Deleuze: Yes, he did do that, and here you are getting too far ahead of me. You need to save your comment for when we get there. At that point… For the moment, I have not said the word “monad” once.The student: In that case, if we’re talking about metaphysical points, perhaps there is not only one metaphysical point, concerning precisely the mathematical point of bodies, but perhaps there are two…
Deleuze: On this, fine, agreed, but here, you are asking me, if I understand your problem correctly, it’s that I don’t want to introduce the idea of metaphysical point or monad without having shown in what ways it would be necessary, and for the moment, we don’t have the elements for showing this necessity. [Interruption of the recording] [96:00]  
 
Part 3
… [Deleuze reacts to a comment made during the pause] We are dealing with a very precise type of problem, and don’t take my comments badly. It’s as if you were drawing me out and taking me back to a huge problem, and by huge problem, I understand it as a false problem. I mean, history… Are there relations at once of physics and metaphysics? Fine, this problem is know by virtue of a particularly stupid schema that we were taught at the time of the baccalauréat indicating that there was a time when philosophy was unified with the sciences, and then little by little, the sciences got separated from philosophy, a schema that is inept and historically false. The sciences have always been quite distinct from philosophy, from metaphysics, whatever you want, [and] there have always been relations [between them]. And then we are told that today, the sciences have won their autonomy, that they no longer have anything to do with metaphysics, a second false proposition. There is not a single physicist who can distinguish what is philosophical or scientific in his work, whether it’s Einstein or any of the great contemporary thinkers, whether they are working on the physical cosmogony. In any case, everyone who counts in physics collides with problems of a philosophical nature. The idea that at one moment, there would be a kind of metaphysical-scientific accord and that now this no longer exists – and this isn’t directed at you, ok? It’s directed at this idea still hanging around everywhere – we absolutely have to get beyond this. If you take the Greeks, however far back you go, they never confused philosophy and physics. Those that were assigned… No doubt, each philosopher had his extremely complex approximation of this; once we admit that the philosophical plane and the plane of knowledge known as scientific are distinct, what is the relation between the two? How do they intersect? A second aspect of the question: has this changed today? It suffices to consider the discourse of a contemporary physicist to realize that it absolutely has not changed. We can at most say that relations are not the same; the relations have evolved at the same time that new forms of relation have been discovered.
Thus, you mustn’t draw me back into this, you understand? The relation maintained by Leibniz between metaphysics and physics is a kind of … If I had started from this point, by details like that, but excuse me, for me, I would have, in my view created a disappointing course because this is an indeterminate question. In this, I am not actually wondering… On the contrary, we are almost in the process of distributing… For example, you sense well that with the entire lower floor for Leibniz, as I have pointed out adequately, he refers to physics and natural history, and I don’t know what relation he still has with metaphysics since I don’t know what metaphysics is according to Leibniz. You sense perhaps that on the upper floor, mathematics is involved there, and there are also metaphysics. I don’t know about the relations; we will know them at the end of the year if we have a basis for it. But if you want me to apply a pre-existing schema onto… Starting off by saying the physics-metaphysics relations at that era, I am saying that we are undertaking a false problem because we are going to get stuck within a completely and radically false schema, I mean, doubly false. We are told, on one hand, that at some point in the past, philosophy and science were more or less mixed up together, and this is historically false. So, I cannot take up a problem that I judge doubly false. There you are. Excuse me, the violence of my answer is not directed at all at you, but at your schemas that seem to weigh on you, to weigh you down.
So there you are, I ask you, and for the last time, we will do a bit of math, but basic math. I ask you for your complete attention, and there are some here who already were here two years ago. I recall that, from an entirely different perspective, I approached this aspect. So, this will be easy for some among you, but also for everyone. You see, my problem is, first, I tried to explain what was the ideal/idea-al fold, specifically this history of the mathematical point on the inflection and the family of curves that derive from it; and my second point is: how do we pass from the fold to infinite series? It’s uniquely this segment; if I manage to finish this today, we will be so tired out that… There, this is what you must not lose; whatever I might say, you have to hold on to this problem.
For I am going to begin by something that, apparently, is very far from this. Why would the continuous simply be rectilinear? Why can’t the continuous be presented under the simple form of a straight line? Well, if you take… At first glance, the continuous can be perfectly represented under the form of a straight line; why? Because what is the law of the straight line? It’s that, between two points, however close they may be, you can always insert a point. — Is this good? When you have a problem, let me know. –Henceforth, if you hear this expression clearly, on a straight line, between two points and however close they may be, I can insert a point; it comes out straight. Between two points on a straight line, however close they might be, I can always insert an infinite number of points. Since I can insert one of them, but between the one I inserted and the original point, I can insert another, to infinity. So, between two points on a straight line, I can insert an infinite number of points. This comes down to saying that the series of points, on a straight line, is compact, as we say, and convergent, compact because I can always insert an infinite number of points between two points, convergent because the distances between the two points fall below any length, however small it might be. So I would say that the series of points on a straight line is compact and convergent. [Pause]
Problem: is this an adequate definition of the continuous? [Pause] I am moving ahead. Between two points, however close they may be, I can always insert a third point, an intermediary point, to infinity. Why? As pure possibility because this point that I inserted between two points, can I consider it as the center of an inflection, as a point of inflection, the inflection going from A to B? The point C, intermediary between A and B, would be the center of an inflection, going from A to B. Eh? [Pause] [You] understand where I am in this? I am blocked. I say, yes, it’s possible, but it’s not necessary. You immediately understand my problem? Is there something that forces me to introduce inflections? Certainly, I can introduce it there by saying, [given] every point squeezed between two points, there is no point on the straight line that cannot be considered to be squeezed between two point – every point on the straight line is a point of inflection. So inflection… [Pause] From point A to point B, and the inserted point being [point] C, the center of an inflection, such that, at the extreme, I would compose my straight line from an infinity of inflections. But there is no necessity. I can always say this as one says something else; it’s what we call an arbitrary hypothesis.
I return to my straight line as a convergent and compact series of points. I can make it correspond to the series of so-called rational numbers, that is, whole numbers and fractional numbers. The series of rational numbers is itself compact and convergent. Henceforth, I can express any number in the form of an infinite series. [Pause] Example: I take a segment of a straight line equal to 2, that is, divided by 2…. Where’s my [chalk]? Ah! [Deleuze gets up] Oh là là là là là là. [He goes to the board and begins writing] There. [Pause] So, each A-C equals 1, C-D equals 1, and A-B equals 2. Is this ok? [Laughter] I divide C-D, [and] I can still insert a point; I divide C-D into 2; I divide B-D into to; I divide A-B into 2; etc. etc. [He sits back down] I now have an infinite series, apparently. This infinite series, I would say, 2 equaling 1, plus ½, plus ¼ , plus 1/8, to infinity. Are you following me? Certain commentators, whose names I won’t say since… They consider that this is an example of infinite series corresponding to Leibniz. I say that this is an absolute misstatement. Why? Because it’s not necessary; I am not forced to express 2 in this form of infinite series. I can always do it if that amuses me or if I have other reasons, but I have no reason for doing so at the moment. I can equally express 2 equals 1 plus 1 plus 0 plus 0 plus 0, to infinity, which would be a series called periodic starting from its third term.
So, there is no necessity for expressing 2 in the form of an infinite series. An irreducible fraction: can I … I can express it in the form of an infinite suite since, in fact, for example, for 7/3 (seven divided by three), I would have 2.232323 to infinity. I can… Is this necessary? No, since 7/3 means a relation such that the same unit is encompassed seven times in a dimension (grandeur) A and three times in a dimension B. That the fraction might be irreducible changes nothing in the matter; there is what is known as… Between two dimensions, between two lengths, 7 and 3, there is an adequate common part (partie adéquate commune), that is, there is a part that is common to two dimensions, a part that in one case is encompassed seven times, and in the other case is encompassed three times. Ok? There is an adequate common part.
So, you can always express your irreducible fractional number in the form of an infinite series. You can do so; you don’t have to do so. It’s not necessary. This is what you have to understand because when, in while yet, we directly consider problems of the infinite in Leibniz, we will bump back into all of… a very important point for the history of philosophy and of mathematics combined, and that still has not changed. Here we have to return to my earlier comment: as concerns the problem of the infinite, mathematicians necessarily find themselves in the situation of doing philosophy, whether they want to or not. Well – what did I want to say? – When we are confronted with this problem of the infinite, we will see a thesis through which Hegel, in his Logics, was equally opposed to Leibniz, and says: the series is a false infinite; the form of the series is not adequate for the infinite; it indicates a false infinite. Fine. Must we think that Leibniz wasn’t aware of this? Quite often, we realize that philosophers have so fully foreseen objections that will be made to them later, right, that it becomes quite discouraging for those who like to make objections, simply if one reads them. So it’s not against Hegel because yet again, Hegel, he didn’t care; he gave his reasons for thinking that …, [Deleuze does not complete the sentence] but some reasons interior to his system. So it’s not about Leibniz that he is talking; it’s about Hegel through the objections of one philosopher or another. He is just clarifying these things, that’s all.
But never did Leibniz consider that sequences of the kind 1 plus ½ plus ¼ plus 1/8 etc. really constituted an infinite series. For we can develop 2 in this way: I can develop two in this form, a pseudo-infinite form. But it’s not necessary. It’s not indispensable. I can just as well say and demonstrate that 2 equals 1 plus 1 since Leibniz demonstrated it in a completely, a very lengthy manner; it’s a very difficult and very interesting demonstration. You understand? So here’s where we are. I mean, sense that we are uniquely here: the straight line furnishes me with compact and convergent series, nonetheless assimilable to the compact and convergent series of rational numbers, that is, whole numbers and fractions. However, it does not provide the occasion for necessarily thinking of the infinite series. [Pause] We could just as well say, yes, fine, an indefinite sequence is sufficient. But an infinite series and an indefinite sequence are not the same.
So there we have the first point. From this point explodes this question: can the continuous legitimately be presented by a straight line? We have to note this: if the continuous can legitimately be presented by a straight line, the expression “labyrinth of the continuous” would become unintelligible. We have to believe that Leibniz had reasons for thinking that the continuous cannot be presented by a straight line, but what reason could he have? [There’s] a reason already famous in the mathematics of his era, but a reason from which he is going to derive all its consequences, and this reveals all of Leibniz’s innovation: not discovering the reason but deriving from it all its consequences. What is it? It’s that although the straight line presents itself as a compact and convergent series of all rational numbers, this straight line is full of holes – there’s the painful revelation – and holes that cannot be seen, but that can easily be demonstrated. Let’s do so: we have to do so, otherwise… I’d like to avoid it… Let’s prove this. [Deleuze goes to the board] Let’s consider a segment of a straight line that we assume is equal to 1, the unit – it matters little if I consider it as small n or the unit, since it changes nothing in the reasoning – I take my segment [He writes on the board] that I consider — the segment, being any segment of a straight line – as a compact and convergent series of whole and fractional numbers, since I can insert between each point on the straight line, etc. Fine, I am saying [that] this segment seems continuous, and yet it is full of holes. The reason is, and nothing opposes this, that it’s possible for me to construct – the drawing is not very pretty… oo là là [Laughter] … This isn’t so bad? – You see, I am constructing an isosceles triangle, that is, A-C equals C-B, rectangle, an isosceles right triangle. You see.
It’s nearly done, but we still have the hardest part. You know that there is a famous theorem [Deleuze writes on the board; he refers to the Pythagorean theorem] that is A-B squared, the square of the hypotenuse, is equal to the square of the two other sides, that is, A-B squared equals A-C squared plus C-B squared. As C-B equals A-C, I am saying that A-B squared equals 2-AC-2. Ok? That’s all, that’s all, I swear. [Laughter] A-B squared equals 2-AC-2 equals 1. Yes? One final effort. You take a compass; you put the point on A, and you trace a radius for A-C [Deleuze writes on the board] This circle is going to cut A-B at a point D. A-C equals A-D, eh? Because these are two radii of the circle. So, according to the famous theorem, A-B2 equals 2-AC2 equals 2-AD2 equals, by hypothesis, 1, and that A-O squared equals 1. Ok? And has your suffering come to an end? If 2-AD2 equals 1, A-D2 equals 1 and 1/2; if A-D2 equals 1 and 1/2 , A-D equals the root of 1 and 1/2. This point is on the line A-B, and you already know the conclusion, the terrible conclusion: There is no whole number, nor any fractional number, whose square would be equal to 1 and 1/2. There is no whole number, nor any fractional number, whose square would be equal to 1 and ½, which can be proven besides. We are proving that if there were such a whole or fractional number, it would have to be both even and odd.
What does this mean? You recognized it, however little you may recall this. It’s what is called an irrational number, the root of 2, the root of 1 and 1/2, etc. What does irrational number mean? We especially must not confuse this with an irreducible fraction. This is where I am taking a giant step. 7 divided by 3: when you say seven thirds, as we say, that just doesn’t seem right. It goes to infinity, but as is said, it’s the false infinite. Why? Because there is the adequate common part; there is a length that presents seven units and a length that presents three units, whereas between the hypotenuse [Deleuze writes on the board] A-B and the side of the triangle A-C, there is no adequate common part. That is, you will find no subdivision of A-C that is contained a number of times in A-C and a number of times in A-B. There is no adequate common part that would allow you to offer a fraction of the 7/3 type, and with all the more reason of the 6/3 type, which is reducible to a whole number. There is no whole number or fractional number in A-D square that is equal to 1 and 1/2.
Fine. You have here an irrational number that belongs neither to whole numbers, nor to fractional numbers. In other words, it’s indeed a point. I can show it now thanks to the preceding demonstration. I can show it on A. And, when I have defined my straight line through the compact and convergent series of whole and fractional numbers, that is, rational numbers, I believe myself to have reached the continuous or the power of the continuous, and in fact, I found myself faced with a structure full of wholes. Why full? Well, understand, earlier, I said as Leibniz’s exclamatory expression, everything is not living, but there is life everywhere. I can revive the expression and say – and this delights me and renders me joyful, at first glance it’s not clear why, but… even I don’t see why, [Laughter] but it puts me into a state of absolute satisfaction – we must say, an exclamatory expression: every number is not irrational, but there are irrational numbers everywhere. And here, I believe myself to be absolutely faithful to Leibniz’s thought. Just as the pond isn’t fish, but is full of fish, so to the series of whole and fractional numbers, and obviously not irrational numbers, there are irrational numbers everywhere in this series. Why are they everywhere? [Deleuze goes to the board] It’s because however close are the two points you locate on a straight line, you can always construct your isosceles right triangle and discover between them, however small might be the portion of the straight line, a point that is not encompassed in the series of corresponding whole or fractional numbers. You understand? If you understand, then that’s marvelous.
You see where I want to go. Only the irrational number – and here, I believe it correct as well, because as I am saying that it’s satisfying for the mind, that it gives me satisfaction, but furthermore it has to be true – only the irrational number founds the necessity of an infinite series. [Pause] The other numbers can always be – they can – that is, they refer to a simple possibility of an infinite series, but they can be developed differently. The infinite does not impose itself on the series. Ah, but when the irrational number take the stage, well then, yes, the irrational number cannot be developed otherwise than by an infinite series. It is the source (fontaine) of infinite series. We must call the irrational number the source of the infinite series, and this is indeed what Leibniz did. Still we have to find an infinite series for each rational number received or located into an example.
And, in a tiny text in his mathematical works, a very beautiful little text, you find Leibniz’s demonstration. You know that pi is an irrational number. Find the infinite series of pi. Is it 3.1416, etc.? No, that’s not a series ; there is no law of the series. Leibniz’s genius is to have demonstrated that pi over 4 equals 1 minus 1/3 plus 1/5 minus 1/7 plus 1/9, to infinity, which is called an alternate infinite series, in which we alternate additions and subtractions. 1 minus 1/3 plus 1/5 minus 1/7 plus 1/9, it was necessary to wait long after Leibniz for the rigorous proof that pi over 4 was itself an irrational number, but Leibniz suspected as much.
So there you have my entire thematic. It’s that infinite series can exactly only be said to exist when the development cannot occur in another form. [Pause] Henceforth, the only irrational numbers are in this case. They are what imposes the infinite series since they cannot be developed otherwise. Contrary to a number of the 2 type, that can be developed in the form of a pseudo-infinite series (2 equals 1 plus 1), it’s when I have no choice, when the infinite series can exist only when the infinite series is necessarily established. And this case is satisfied when the limit is a rational number.
Good, so then we have everything we wanted. Why? How has the irrational number been introduced onto the straight line? I hold everything here. If you have understood, you have grasped me completely. The dizziness of infinite mathematics opens within because, listen well, how have you caused your hole to appear on the straight line which nonetheless is compact and seemed so full? You caused it to appear only by introducing curvature, that is, by having an arc of a circle cut through the line. [Pause] Otherwise, you could never have been able to show the holes in the appearance of the rectilinear continuity. [Pause] So it’s therefore necessarily the element of curvature that introduces infinite series. Eh? It enters into an infinite series since, however small might be the section considered [Deleuze goes to the board] – I come back to my little figure; those in the back don’t see it, it’s so small, you see? — however small might be the section considered, and even smaller than this one, and even smaller than this one, etc., I could still construct a triangle, eh, whatsit, an isosceles right triangle [Students help him with the term] through which or starting from which I will trace a circle, which is a manner of rounding off the angle. And it’s by rounding off the angle in the construction triangle that I unveil the invisible stroke in my segment, and I can say that it’s the curvature that introduces the infinite series and that establishes its necessity. Henceforth, I would say, there you have why the continuous is not a straight line, but a labyrinth. An infinite series of inflection, an infinite series of curvature, an infinite series of folds, such is the irrational number. I go from the fold to the infinite series. Eh? [Pause]
Henceforth, I would say, in what sense can we speak of Baroque mathematics? I would say that Baroque mathematics… that we can call Baroque mathematics to be mathematics that are distinguished from classical arithmetic which is an arithmetic of the rational number, and from classical geometry which is a geometry of the straight line and indirectly of the curve. Founded by Huygens to the extent that he produced the study of curvatures, we will call Baroque mathematics to be mathematics defined by and as an arithmetic of the irrational number and as a geometry of inflections. In this sense and under these conditions, the word Baroque can be applied to mathematics, and we will conclude that yes, however little we have said about it, Leibniz’s mathematics are Baroque mathematics and, through this, they oppose Descartes’s mathematics. For when Leibniz himself tries to distinguish his conception of mathematics from Descartes’s, he says this:… [2:19:20]
[There is a change of tape recorder, with lowered audio quality, but also a jump backward on the tape, i.e. a repetition of the preceding 2 1/2 minutes. The tape picks up here]
 
Part 4
…Descartes only considers algebraic equations and left aside equations of another nature known as transcendent, assigning them to the simple domain of the mechanical. And what are transcendent equations? Leibniz, on the other hand, declares that the mathematics he is creating must directly treat the transcendents. And, what is a transcendent equation such as it had been defined by mathematicians of this era? The transcendent equation is the equation that corresponds to a curve engendered by two independent movements the relation of which cannot be exactly measured, that is, that cannot be measured either by a whole number or by a fractional number.
You see? The continuous is not rectilinear. The continuous is a labyrinth because only the fold or the inflection takes account of the necessity of infinite series. If I define the continuous in a rectilinear manner, this would be a continuous still full of holes. I cannot define the continuous on the level of the straight line. [This is] another way of showing that it’s a means of rounding of angles, a theme ever-present in the entire Baroque. Just as I created the connection with [René] Thom, I remind you that in modern mathematics, a theme has met with great attention, a topic from a mathematician, a very interesting author names [Benoit] Mandelbrot, [Deleuze spells out the name] concerning what he calls fractal objects, fractal objects. Here I will go very, very quickly; I am giving you a grotesque presentation of this, given how rudimentary this has been. You’ll see what its link is to what we were just discussing.
Having drawn a segment – I’ve lost my chalk; ah, here it is. [Deleuze goes to the board] [Pause] You will see how beautiful this is. – I take a segment. It’s not wavy like that one. [Here, given the change of recorder, part of this development at the board is inaudible] A first straight line […] I construct my trilateral triangle. And here, I do the same thing, and here as well. […] And I continue the trilateral triangle. There, I do the same thing, same thing, same thing. [Laughter] At the extreme, what do I have? At the extreme, as Mandelbrot shows this so well, I have a very special kind of curve in which all the angles are erased. I have an infinitely open curve, that is, that fills up the entire plane. As Mandelbrot said, it’s exactly the operation that occurs on a map when you increase the scale. If you extend the scale toward the scale named real, well then, each time you are going to construct onto a cape a cape, and on the cape, another cape, etc., to infinity. At the extreme, you will have an open curve that occupies the entire plane. Insofar as it’s an open curve, it has no surface and yet it occupies the entire plane. As Mandelbrot said, it’s very strange; it has dimensions at the intermediary of 1 and 2. In fact, in mathematics, calculations are logarithms, for logarithms, for those of you who know what these are, logarithms are connected to operations through which angles are rounded, and logarithms are very important in the mathematics of the seventeenth century, right, in all of Baroque mathematics. Logarithms must be linked to infinite series first of all. At the extreme, there is this curve that Mandelbrot discusses, a curve with the dimension logarithm 4 over logarithm 3; appreciate that logarithm 4 over logarithm 3 is an irrational number. Or rather, we have no basis for admiring this since there is an infinite series and there are irrational numbers at the limit of the infinite series.
I can do the opposite, and instead of adding capes infinitely to the figure – this is what Mandelbrot says cleverly, noting that: How does one measure the coasts? How does one measure a country’s coasts? Well, you take a scale that allows you to define the capes and bays, and if you change the scale, you will perpetually have other capes on your map or other bays in your bay. You can just as well subtract bays as add capes. You will arrive at the same coast, with the dimension 1.2, neither in the dimension 1, nor in the dimension 2, but it will be intermediary between a line and a surface. These are great, yet beautiful mysteries. At the extreme, you have this curve; it no longer has any tangents. As Mandelbrot says, it’s the infinitely cavernous body, or the infinitely spongy body. Hey! The infinitely elastic body, that suits us quite well.
So we rediscover [this], and it’s about this that I would like you to reflect between now and the next class. What I believe to have done, I hope… I know that this has been difficult, and you have endured this very well. But that’s it now. This will be… We have finished with math, I dare say. What I want you to retain is the purely logical linkages: How did we go from the fold to the infinite series? That is, why can’t the continuous be rectilinear, but necessarily a labyrinth? Answer: the rectilinear continuous is only an apparition full of holes, these holes being marked by irrational numbers which themselves imply curvatures, elements of curvatures, such that they are the source of infinite series. [Pause] What we have shown, if you will, is that we had to go from the fold as inflection to the infinite series through the intermediary of the irrational number.
What’s left for us to do in order to complete this first floor, the upper floor? The second part of what I would like to demonstrate is that this time, it is not enough to go from the fold as inflection of the infinite series. We have to go from the infinite series to inclusion, which is quite a simple idea, to wit: folding, folding, it’s quite lovely. We fold, we fold to infinity. That’s what we have just shown: if you fold, you fold to infinity. Thus, the fold is the expression of the infinite. So, this is what you must dream about: the fold is infinite. The fold is the form of the infinite. [Pause]
Fine, the fold is the form of the infinite, but why do we fold? Here I would like to say the most banal thing in the world, and it’s really great. One cannot do philosophy without going astray (fauter), and then I don’t know how to say it, from the greatest paradox to the greatest banality, and it’s by seeking support from an enormous banality that we can again move back to something astonishing. At this point, we are strong in speaking to others, that is, to non-philosophers. What would you have us do? If you lean toward this banality, you have to go all the way, that is, all the way to the other side of the banality which is a nonsensical paradox. So, we discover the enormous banality immediately: what is the use of folding? Why do we fold? So this seems obvious to me, and this is a spatial intuition from Leibniz. But when you fold something, it’s to place it inside. You fold a piece of paper to put it inside an envelope. Folding is for putting inside, and this is the only way to put it inside. In other words, we go from the fold to inclusion. Inclusion is the final cause of the fold. I fold to place within. I want to make a package, so I fold. I fold the newspaper to put it in my pocket. I fold my handkerchief; it’s no stronger than that. The fold goes beyond itself toward inclusion, you see? So the two operations are: from the fold to the infinite series, from the infinite series to inclusion.
If the continuous is a labyrinth, in the end it’s because it is inside. It’s inside what? It’s inside the soul such that, I would say, we pass continually from the labyrinth of the continuous to the labyrinth of freedom. The labyrinth of the continuous is: the continuous is not rectilinear; it implies the infinite series of inflections or the infinite series of the fold. The labyrinth of freedom is: what is the use of folding? It’s for placing with the soul so that each soul has within it an infinity of folds that it cannot unfold all at once. And what does it mean to be a soul? O how this is torturous, how this is torturous. It’s having twenty-two, forty, two thousand, an infinity of folds. And the pleats of matters are there only because they find their reason most profoundly in the final inclusions of the folds in the soul. Orthodoxy was greatly suspicious of Leibniz. This soul full of folds indeed appeared suspect, especially when we see what Leibniz will derive from his soul full of folds, and you see that he found that Descartes’s soul was truly too rectilinear.
Fine, I am launching a great appeal. I would really like that for the next time, which will be in a little while now since next Tuesday is the 11 November, so we have to… That comes at a good moment because you will need all that time to reflect. I would truly like for you to review all this because I am ready to start over, I don’t care, if it’s not entirely clear, because I would like… What I did here is the tale of the fold-infinite series-irrational [number]; how these three notions are connected, and how from this we conclude that the continuous cannot be rectilinear, but is indeed a labyrinth. If you haven’t understood this, we will start over… Yes? [A question from a student] At the same level; I am saying that on this point, Leibniz can create a very original conception of the pleating onto oneself by virtue of all this. If you will, he is going to complicate all the ready-made expressions and understand them in a completely new direction, in Leibniz’s thought. [End of the session] [2:39:00]
 
Session 3, 18 November 1986: Point of View
Part 1
[The film starts with Deleuze entering the classroom, then jumps to him seated between several students at his table, and ready to start]
Let’s get going. So I owe you some explanations about all this [the camera crew and set-up]. Here’s what it’s about: the department of philosophy had [invited] a team for a video philosophy course. That interests me a lot, the question of knowing if, in a face-to-face course, something could pass through video, or if nothing passes. So then we decided to try it out twice. This is going to be difficult, and difficult for everyone, two attempts of this sort. Several years ago, we had already tried it with Marielle [Burkhalter], but I think that the equipment then was not as good. And in some ways, this seemed like a good thing to render… but in the end, the spoken word-video relations, all that, seem to me interesting, at least for me, that is. And then, I have an even more perverse idea, that since you force me to speak in front of machines [Deleuze points to the line of tape recorders set in front of him on the table], it’s a dream of having myself taken into an even greater machine than you. All this connects obviously to the subject of our meeting today which will be, you will understand quickly, something like the inclusion of points of view, or the inclusion of points of hearing, that is, as a point of view can adopt another point of view, can identify another point of view, can encompass another point of view, or a point of hearing, can seize another point of hearing. Good, on that note, let’s go.
I will try to summarize so that this will be very clear, where we are right now. I will try to summarize where we are. You remember… — I’d like you to keep this vaguely in mind each time. — You remember what our global problem is for the entire year? Our problem is the possibility of a definition of Baroque philosophy, that is, of Leibniz’s philosophy, as a function of the following determination, the fold, starting from the idea that in the end, the Baroque operation par excellence is the fold, creating folds, on the condition that this be to infinity (à l’infini); the fold taken to infinity, with everything that this entails, notably the operation of smoothing angles: that’s what would define the Baroque act.
But hardly had we stated this regarding Leibniz, that it was a philosophy that carried the fold, the pleating, to infinity, than we saw that there was a bifurcation. That is, the fold was distributed between two floors, the lower floor and the upper floor. And on the lower floor were the pleats of matter, the pleats of matter when matter is subjected to infinity. And the pleats of matter when subjected to infinity, we saw… We began by studying them in a very general manner, and we were connected… The pleats of matters connected us, on one hand, to the elastic physical body, and on the other hand, to the organic body that possessed the property of folding its own parts and of unfolding its own parts. Folding in its own parts was the involution of the organic body; unfolding its own parts was the evolution of the organic body. And from that point, we came upon some pairs of notions: in-volving and evolving; implicating and explicating; enveloping, developing – all pairs of notions that manifested the fold.
And then, the last time, we moved on to the other floor, and the other floor was no longer the pleats of matter, it was the fold of the soul. Why these two floors? We are still far from being able to consider this question. We will take them as they come. The folds in the soul are going to constitute the other floor, as what? As form of the infinite, or as the ideal genetic element.[1]
To each floor, you remember, corresponded two labyrinths. Leibniz told us that all philosophy was stretched between two labyrinths: the labyrinth of the continuous under development, but I would also say that it pleated itself since the labyrinth is the figure of the fold: the labyrinth of the continuous that pleated itself of enveloped itself into matter. And [there is] the labyrinth of freedom that enveloped itself in the soul. And no doubt, what nearly interests me the most is the communication between these two labyrinths. In fact, they communicate just as the two floors communicate.
Good, good, good. So we had started studying folds in the soul as a form of the infinite. And the last time, we only went, we had travelled a little bit onto the path of this second labyrinth. We had gone from inflection to the infinite series. That was our goal for the previous meeting, and that came down to saying some very, very simple things: this meant, first, that the genetic element of the fold was inflection – I won’t go back over all that – that is, the irregular curve of the line around a point, called the point of inflection. You recall the small, quite simple schema. [Deleuze gestures a curve in the air] And we had already gotten a very, very schematic idea of the sense in which Leibniz’s mathematics was a mathematics of curves or of forms of curvatures.
And from inflection, or from the curves, we passed on to the idea of infinite series. Leibniz’s mathematics was not only mathematics of curves, but also mathematics of infinite series, which meant what? It meant that the curve is necessarily developed in the form of an infinite series, and that we had to be careful about the notion of infinite series since this notion could only be founded there where it was necessarily a development of an infinite series and could not be presented otherwise. Each time the development could be presented otherwise, that is, as unfolding, each time the development could be presented otherwise, the very idea of the infinite series lacked foundation. And there was one case, as it seemed evident, in which the development could only be presented in the form of an infinite series, which was the case of the irrational number. And it was the irrational number that gave us the key to the Leibnizian notion of infinite series.
Moreover, what does the irrational number have to do with the curve? In order to make our genesis coherent, showing this link is required, which is what we did at the last meeting. In fact, we showed how the irrational number, locatable on a straight line, was only locatable on this straight line to the extent that we had a curve intersect the point that the irrational number on the line truly was, as we could say, a curvilinear point and not a rectilinear point. Rectilinear points were represented by whole and fractional numbers, but the irrational number referred to a truly curvilinear point, that is, the descent of the inflection onto the straight line.
Good. For those who weren’t here at the least meeting, this is not that important, but you could better understand, I assume. I am summing up a bit what… But I would like, even for those who weren’t here… I am assuming that this is a given, that this outcome is given, specifically that inflection is expressed, or the variable curve, if you wish, is expressed in infinite series. After all, it’s very simple, as I told you: take two points on a straight line, as close as you might want. You can always intercalate one, through which an inflection passes, that is, that will be an inflection point. Given two points A and B, whatever their proximity, you can intercalate a point C that will then be the center of an inflection of A to B. Fine, quite simple. If you wish, here it’s rather crude, but it’s the simplest way to give you a sense of the way in which inflection is developed in the form of an infinite series.
Fine. So we were going from inflection to the infinite series. Today’s task is what? To go from the infinite series to … no, not the infinite series; going from inflection to inclusion through the intermediary of infinite series. Why is this today’s task? Well, the line is folded to infinity; that’s the Baroque theme. The line is folded to infinity; it’s a line with variable curvature. But why? [Does] Leibniz really like “why” questions? Here again, in my own view, at the point we have reached in the analysis, we are deliberating on such simple things. Why is a line folded to infinity? Well, in order to place it within, to place it inside, that is, it’s folded to infinity because it is included (incluse); it is included insidu. Inside what? In other words, inclusion is the final cause, as one might say in philosophy; inclusion is the final cause of the fold to infinity. What I am saying here, it’s as stupid as… You fold a letter; you fold a piece of paper to place it inside. You fold a letter, a piece of paper [Deleuze takes a piece of paper and folds] to put it in an envelope. Imagine that the envelope is infinitely tiny. You fold… [Deleuze keeps folding] Whew! [He folds it to a compressed block] From inflection to inclusion. I am not yet saying into what the line of the infinite fold, the infinitely folded line, I am not saying within what it is going to be included. There would have to be… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
Understand today’s goal: what is the term that I must necessarily consider as that which [the folded object] is folded into? That which is folded, is folded into something. So there is going to have to be something, by whatever nature it might be, that it must contain, that it must encompass, that it must envelop the fold. Good, so we see at least… once again, at the last meeting we went from inflection to an infinite series. Today, that was only half of our path, corresponding to the upper floor. We have to follow the other half, that is, from inflection to inclusion through the intermediary of infinite series.
So, fine, I would like that to stay… This all seems to be complicated, but you also get that these are extremely simple operations. As soon as we talk about folding, it’s about practical exercises. There are two ways for you to understand me: on the level of practical exercises, of folding exercises, and in mathematics, it’s quite important; in biology, it’s quite important; and then in a no doubt philosophical way, corresponding to Leibnizian concepts. But this doesn’t mean that concepts aren’t overlaid (doublés) with extremely simple sensitive intuitions. I do believe that it’s very unfortunate to try to understand Leibniz starting from considerations on the inclusion of predicates in the subject, to the extent that I ask those who are somewhat familiar with Leibniz almost to forget him. All of those who are somewhat familiar with Leibniz know that he’s an author who says that predicates are contained in the subject, that is, “crossing the Rubicon” is contained in the subject Caesar. So we can consider such an idea to be interesting, strange, whatever you want, but it seems very abstract. Why does he say it? This is why we have tried to start off from something else entirely. The advantage of this: [so that] the idea of attributing “crossing the Rubicon” as encompassed in Caesar, would at that point for us, at a certain moment, go without saying.
So I mean [that] sensitive intuition, going from the fold to inclusion, from inflection to inclusion, is very simple. Only we have to follow it step by step and try to construct philosophical notions starting from this idea: that which is folded, is placed inside. That which is folded, rolls itself within. Within what? Within something equal to X. What is this something equal to X that exists to receive that which is folded? Well here, we have to go carefully, and I come back to my inflection. [Deleuze asks for some chalk, then gets up to go to the blackboard; he draws a curve] You recall this entirely convincing drawing of a random inflection with variable curve. [Deleuze sits down, then gets up again] It’s not right. [He draws a new curve, then sits down] Ok, that’s done. For the moment, we are considering two things: the point describing the inflection and the point of inflection itself. The point of inflection itself is the point in relation to which the tangent crosses the curve. Obviously, we have to consider a third kind of point, which is what? This third kind of point I could call the center of curvature. What is this center of curvature? [Pause] It’s the point at which are supposed to meet all the lines perpendicular to tangents of each point taken into the inflection. [Deleuze draws a series of perpendicular lines crossing the line of inflection of one of the curve’s folds] Eh? This speaks all by itself [the modified drawing].
An immediate objection: if it’s an inflection of irregular curvature, there will not exactly be a point, but the center of the curvature will itself run along a closed curve. Why closed? [Deleuze adds to the drawing] Because when you reach the point of inflection, the one whose tangent crosses the curve, you jump to another center of curvature. [Deleuze draws a point in the center of the adjoining curving] You jump to another center of curvature. In fact, in an inflection of variable curvature, all the lines perpendicular to tangents do not meet in a point, but in a region defined by a closed curve. When you jump to the other half [of the curvature], beyond the point of inflection, you jump to another center that itself is not simply presented as a point. Fine; in other words, the center of curvature in an irregular curvature runs along a determined region. We will say… let’s assume… Let’s settle on terms: we will say that it has a site (un site). It has a site. So it happens, when the curvature is regular, you have a center point, or you have a site, that is, a region described by the center. Fine. [Pause]
This is very important for us because what does this come down to saying? This means saying that the center is what? The center of a curve, of an inflection with irregular curvature, is and can also be called point of view onto the inflection, point of view onto the curve. It’s in the direction of concavity. We have made a lot of progress since the last meeting, but all this is in some ways very, very elementary. Inflection is affected by a vector of concavity. I mean [that] the privilege of concavity in the inflection is what? It means that it’s on the side of the concavity that a center is determinable. How is this determinable center on the concavity side presented? It is presented as point of view. To the extent that the center runs along a region, we will speak of the site of point of view. [Deleuze pauses] Fine.[2]
Here I am indeed saying that although we are accessing a new determination of the point, [Deleuze turns, points to the drawing on the board] I am no longer considering the point on the inflection, I am no longer considering the singular point that we call point of inflection, there where the tangent crosses the curve. I am considering a third kind of point that I can determine as a point of view running along a site, and determinable by [pointing to the drawing] all that, all these little lines that I drew, and I can also call them vectors of concavity. [Pause] Point of view. There we are (Voilà).
Among all of Leibniz’s strokes of genius, here you have his, or one of them: the transformation of the center into point of view. We have just taken a huge step in terms of our problem, moving from inflection to inclusion. I would like for you to sense this. But the ideal would be to sense it without yet understanding it; the ideal is to realize it. So I only hold onto this idea: you see, I have passed from inflection, that is, from irregular curvature from which we started, to the idea of a point of view, point of view onto the curvature, point of view onto the inflection, defined outside the line by the center as point of view, the center running along a site.
Sense that every point in space can be treated henceforth as a point of view. Ah, every point in space could be treated as a point of view. But if this is true, if it’s true, it gives enormously, that gives a kind of new gravity to space, a new consistency to space, and it removes from space its former consistency. Every point in space can be treated as a point of view: what does that mean? That means something quite simple. That means that every point in space is such that intersect there – it’s not very complicated – that intersect there an infinity of convergent straight lines. [Deleuze draws a point on the board, then straight lines crossing through it] Whatever might be the point in space that you were considering, I can have an infinity of straight lines converge through here, which comes down to saying what? According to what we just saw, every point in space is a possible point of view. Let’s complete this: every point in space is a possible point of view on an inflection with irregular curvature.
What a strange world… what a strange world was Leibniz’s world. We call it the Baroque world. [Deleuze pauses here, reflecting]
Every point in space is such that an infinity of convergent straight lines can intersect there. Fine. Doesn’t that also mean that every point in space is such that I can always cause a parallel straight line to pass there in all directions? [Pause] It’s the same thing. [Deleuze turns toward the drawing, then again draws on the board] Given a point in space, I can have a straight line with its parallels pass through there, but also a straight line in another direction. [The drawing is a series of parallel lines going in different directions in order to create a figure with crossing lines in a criss-cross pattern] Notice that my first drawing, through all points in space, an infinity of concurrent straight lines can still be passing in this point. And then [in] my other drawing, through all points in space, I can have as many straight lines as I want pass there, with corresponding parallels in all directions. The first case refers to what is called a conical perpective. [Deleuze gets up to draw again] You see? [He draws a set of lines emanating from a point or crossing through it] My second case refers to what is called a cylindrical perspective. The conical perspective and the cylindrical perspective are immanent to each other. Any point in space is referable to both systems, which comes down to saying something that a mathematician contemporary with Leibniz, [Girard] Desargues, [Deleuze spells out the name] had developed, that concurrent straight lines and parallel straight lines are of the same arrangement (ordonnance).[3]
The cylindrical perspective, what is it? It’s the point of concurrence to infinity at an infinite distance, and the conical perspective is the point of concurrence at a finite distance. What’s important is the mutual immanence of one and the other. The cylindrical perspective is present in all the conical perspectives; the conical perspectives are present, the infinity of perspectives is present in the cylindrical perspective. You immediately sense what Leibniz is going to say, specifically: the cylindrical perspective is God; the conical perspectives are creatures. What do they have in common? That of being points of view, points of view perpetually implicated in one another, immanent to one another.
[Leibniz’s] Discourse on Metaphysics [Deleuze pages through a book] I am just reading so that you get the tone: “For God considers from every angle the general system of particular events that he has thought fit to produce to manifest his glory, turning it on all sides, so to speak.”[4] How beautiful, right? You see? [Deleuze rereads the same citation, then continues] “As he considers all the faces of the world in all possible ways . . . each view of the universe, as though looked at from a certain viewpoint, results in a substance”, you and me, we are substance, “that expresses the universe in just that way”. One cannot say any better that we are conical perspectives immanent to the cylindrical perspective of God.
Good. So there we are. We have passed from inflection to the idea of the center of curvature that is necessarily point of view. It’s already a huge step, [Pause] point of view describing a site. And there… Let’s try to move forward more. I am insisting on the fundamental importance of this transformation of this point into point of view. One of the best books on Leibniz is one by Michel Serres, Le Système de Leibniz [Leibniz’s System], and it’s one of the aspects on which Serres has insisted most: how in Leibniz, it’s the center [that] stops being a center of configuration to become, if you will, an optical center, that is, a point of view.[5] This is no longer the point of view that refers to a center; it’s every center that refers to a point of view, and can only be defined from there, what Serres expresses by saying that for a geometry of the sphere or circle is substituted the geometry of the cone, the cone whose vertex is a point of view.
What does that respond to? It responds, in fact, to a so-called dramatic situation of the seventeenth century, or with all the more reason, of the Baroque world, to the extent that infinity is introduced everywhere, in the pleats of matter, without series, in the folds of the soul, etc. The world is in the process of losing all center. In fact, how to center the infinite? Where is there a center in infinity? The center is nowhere. The loss of center, right, is a… is almost the dramatic consciousness of the Baroque world. And in a sense, the dramatic consciousness of the loss of center is what affects the entire seventeenth century. Where can a center be located in infinity? [Deleuze chants] “Give us back a center.” Good, they have lost all center; they have lost the earth. They swim in infinity. Good, but swimming in infinity, there is no center, hence, as Serres shows very well, the importance of an operation consisting of changing radically the conception of center. The center, it can no longer be found as point of equilibrium in a configuration. We are going to see it under the new form of point of view.
In this regard, it’s what traverses Leibniz’s entire philosophy, but it’s what traverses all of Pascal’s Pensées. And Serres is right in this regard to create a long parallel between Pascal and Leibniz… — What is it? [Nothing, nothing: A brief interruption by a student to Deleuze’s left] — What does that mean, all that, the center becomes point of view? You see there… What we are seeking in this second moment of our analysis is a kind of general confirmation of what we grasped in a limited way by the prior analysis of inflection, notably: inflection refers to a center of curvature that is presented as a point of view, as a point of view going along a site. Now we are seeking the most general expression of this transformation of the center into a point of view. And we locate the most general confirmation immediately in a chapter of mathematics that, for the seventeenth century, is fundamental, and comes from the geometrician Desargues, who will have as much influence on Descartes as on Pascal and Leibniz. And this chapter of mathematics that I’m thinking of is one known under the title “Conical sections”.
The conical sections, what is this? Without doubt, the history of conical sections is an ancient history of mathematics, but here let’s continue. I am saying some very rudimentary things; it doesn’t matter if you don’t understand. And I am saying that it’s well known, but the ancient mathematicians, let’s say, felt the need — they couldn’t do any differently – to pass through a certain geometrical figure which was a right-angled triangle encompassed in a circle. They needed that to establish the theme of the conical sections that we still don’t know about. So they passed through the right-angled triangle encompassed in a circle; it was the triangle through the axis. As Pascal said in a small text on the conicals (les coniques), he says that the great merit of his contemporaries, and of Desargues foremost, is that they no longer need to employ the triangle through the axis. So this makes a kind of… what? [A] direct consideration of what is called conical sections.
What is that? Don’t take at all seriously mathematically what I am saying since we have finished with… I don’t at all want… and then… — [Deleuze gets up, looking for a way to erase the board] You wouldn’t have a small…? There we are, I’ll move over here. [He moves to the empty board, on the right] — You see, it’s a double cone, but if I gave you just one of them, that’s no reason not to give you two. “S” is the vertex; [it’s] useless to tell you that it’s a point of view-vertex. The eye is supposed to be an “S”. You see what that means? We are already going to substitute for a geometry of the sphere or circle a geometry of the cone. That means that we are going to substitute for the determination of centers the determination of points of view. It’s the jump from the center to the point of view. [Deleuze continues drawing] And well, look at your cone, assuming that there’s a circular base. It could have another base; there are lots of more complicated cases, but you have a circular base.
You cut it by a plane parallel to the base. What do you have? You have a circle. [Deleuze writes ‘circle’ on the board] You cut it along an oblique plane [and] you have an ellipse. [He writes ‘ellipse’ on the board] You cut it along a plane… like that… [a nearly diagonal angle] I don’t know what to call that, but you see. You cut it into.. [Students suggest terms] No, it’s not parallel… Anyway, in short, you have a parabola. And you cut it in a way that both cones are affected, [and] you have a hyperbola. You cut it in “S” [of the vertex], along a plane passing through “S”, and you have a point. You cut it along a plane passing through the generative points of the cone, passing through here, for example, [and] you have a straight line…. That’s it [He finishes writing each term]. Everything I am saying is lamentable, [Deleuze sits down] lamentable, but I mean… This has nothing to do with… It’s just to indicate to you, to indicate what? But here, it’s curious. I placed myself into “S”, point of view, and what did I do? I varied the planes for cutting my cone, and I have obtained successively circle, ellipse, parabola, hyperbola, point, and straight line.
What is it? At first glance, there is nothing in common between these things, between a point and an ellipse, between a straight line and a parabola, between a hyperbola and a parabola. What is it? And nonetheless what can I say, following Serres’s formulation — and that barely suffices — I have the metamorphosis of the circle, where I have what? The connections between a family of curves, if I stick with this case, because I can consider the point and the straight line, that is, when the plane of slice passes through “S” and when it passes through a generative of the cone, I can consider that these are so-called “degenerated” cases. No, but if I take curves – the circle, the ellipse, the parabola, the hyperbola – what do they have in common? Mathematically here, they have something in common, to be at the second degree. Seemingly, they seem to have nothing in common. And yet, I pass from one to the other, the metamorphoses of the circle, by causing the point to vary, the plane of slicing the cone, under the point of view “S”. The center is no longer the center of the circle, or even the foyers of the ellipses; the center is the point of view as a function of which I have a law of passage, from circle to ellipse, parabola, hyperbola.
What is the object? At the extreme, I no longer know. I can say… When I say the metamorphoses of the circle – and there as well, Serres showed it quite well – when I say metamorphoses of the circle, I privilege the circle. But first, my cone is not at all necessarily with a circular base. It can be concave, convex, whatever you’d like. And then… [Pause] There are no reasons for the circle to have the absolute privilege. The object in all these projects [Deleuze indicates the new drawing] are projections, what are called in mathematics of the era the geometral. But at the extreme, understand, the geometral is only grasped by God. We, with our finite points of view, we only grasp projections, and not only projections, we grasp the connection of one projection to another. The object is the connection of projections, or if you prefer, if you would like a more modern language, the synthesis of profiles. Every object is in profile. There are only profiles. To perceive is to create a synthesis in profile. Husserl would be infinitely more Leibnizian if he was himself conscious of being so, and yet he was quite conscious of being so. Fine.
So the geometral will perhaps be the object such that it responds to God’s cylindrical perspective. But us, we are happy with profiles and their connections. It’s the metamorphosis, the object in metamorphosis. This comes down to saying what? That it’s another way of saying what we saw at the last meeting: thanks to the notion of point of view, there changes radically the very idea of the object in Leibniz. To underscore the new status of the object, I was proposing that we call it with a strange name – alas, Leibniz did not use it, but we, we can invent the term: we could say that we have found a new text, [with] the true name of this type of object, that could be the objectile.[6] What is it? Saying that the object is an objectile… what could that mean? Why introduce a term like that except as a joke? And still, we don’t joke around all that much. [Laughter] Why [introduce the term]? In order to regroup a certain number of characteristics.
We would have to say that the objectile is the object insofar as it exists only under its profiles. Henceforth, the object’s perspective implies an infinite series of profiles, the synthesis of an infinite series of profiles. Thus it’s the objectile; it’s the object insofar as it passes through an infinite series. Or if you prefer, it’s the object insofar as it states (decline) a family of curves, such as circle, ellipse, parabola, hyperbola. Or if you prefer — and here we don’t emphasize Leibniz’s modernity at all, just as he is truly modern – it’s the object insofar as it’s defined through a group of transformations. You see there that the conical sections introduce the idea of a group of transformations by virtue of which I pass from the circle to the ellipse, from the ellipse to the parabola, etc. Or if you prefer, the objectile is the object insofar as it’s affected by a curvature or an inflection of variable curvature. There we are, we can say all that. It’s a profoundly theatrical world. At the same time, think… think about the Baroque world, of the importance in Baroque festivals of the transformative decors. The transformative decors were the basis, nearly the basic element of the Baroque festival. Good. It’s the Italian theater, really, and Leibniz often identifies with the Italian theater: he says, yes, the world is like an Italian theater, the world is like a transformative décor, that is, the object is indefinable, independently from a group in transformation that affects it or independently of a variable curvature that affects it. It therefore has an entirely newly status for the object.
Furthermore, furthermore, it doesn’t suffice to speak of metamorphoses because metamorphosis is the passage from one form to another form. The sole conclusion that I can draw is that, in fact, the theory of conical sections as elaborated by Desargues and Pascal in the seventeenth century has the innovation of introducing this theme of metamorphoses of the objet and of truly belonging to what we were seeking as criterion of Baroque mathematics. You see? Of course, I don’t pretend to have said anything mathematical at all about the theory of conical sections. And nonetheless, I still have to allude to mathematics so let’s return briefly, before being done with this point – the new status of the object, the objectile – let’s return to Desargues in his theory of conical sections.
His departure point will be as follows, and you will see that this refers entirely to our problem about projections. Imagine a triangle, any triangle, which turns around an axis. It turns continually around an axis. [Deleuze makes a circular, turning gesture] Are you imagining your triangle? [Pause] The projections of this triangle correspond to each position of the triangle. Good. Is there a law of projections? Can one discern a law of projections, that is, variable images of the triangle as it turns around its axis? Desargues explains that one must — here, I am saying this because it interests greatly, but finally, what I am going to say, at the same time… [Deleuze rises and goes to the board; there is a slight jump in the film’s editing. On the recording, one hears Deleuze’s comments as he draws the triangle] There’s my axis; there’s my triangle. It’s turning around the axis. You see that it corresponds to different projections according to each position of the triangle. So – aie, aie, aie, I have to redo it, this isn’t right… I need to change this… Ok, that will do – I am just saying that in order to account for the law of projections, Desargues is going to bring six points into play, six – you can guess, there are six determinable ones – six points on the axis, right, corresponding to the vertex. [Return to the film][7]
You see, I have three [points], and then corresponding to the extension of the sides of the triangle. [He continues drawing, tracing the extensions and marking the points of intersection with a straight line] One… (two… three…) Ouf! [He traces just to the top edge of the board] See how smart my drawing is; it’s stopping just in time. One-two-three-four-five-six! [He enumerated the points of intersection on the line, then sits back down] [Desargues] is going to consider — and here is where it gets interesting in the mathematics that I am not discussing — these six points, [Desargues] is going to show that there is between them a certain proportion between the segments it determines, a certain proportion, a certain rapport between the six points. And what is he going to call this rapport, with a term that will endure in mathematics from Desargues onward? He is going to call it a rapport of involution, involution, you remember, of envelopment, a rapport of envelopment as if, in fact, all the projections of the mobile triangle enveloped this rapport. Involution; involvere; the envelopment. One might say that this rapport of involution is as if enveloped, folded into each projection.[8] Good. [Pause]. Well, ok. From there on, he will pass into the matter of four points ; he will pass into his theory of conical sections.
Fine, fine, fine, fine, fine. So, I was saying that this doesn’t yet suffice, this definition of the objectile as passage from one form to another, as a metamorphosis of the form. And in other words, the form is constantly in metamorphosis; such is the objectile. The object with variable curvature, the objectile is the object with variable curvature. That isn’t sufficient. Why? Because that does indeed give us, that does indeed give us a possibility of defining the point of view anew, of giving a new definition of the point of view. What could one say? Well, here, I’ve placed everything in a stack [Deleuze indicates the second drawing on the board], circle, ellipse, parabola, hyperbola. I just know that there is a variant, a community in all these figures. Good, but the point of view gives me another possibility: [Jump in the film editing, 90 seconds; access from BNF recording] in fact, it’s the case that I placed them in a disorderly way; why? Once we are under a point of view, the question is the possibility of introducing an order into the transformations. In what kind of form, this order? In other words, you see, point of view is that point starting from which I can establish an arrangement (ordonnance), and no doubt, there are several arrangements under the same point of view. [There are] several arrangements, yes, yes, yes. For example, I am looking at the cleverness in disorder; I made a list in disorder. What kind of order can I introduce? Let’s suppose, I tell myself suddenly: finite or infinite? Finite or infinite, with a question mark ? I answer: [Return to film] the point finite, the straight line infinite; the circle finite, the parabola infinite; the ellipse finite, the hyperbola infinite. I have created an alternation of finite and infinite cases. I could have chosen other criteria. For example, are there double points or not? Sometimes yes, sometimes no. Arranging (ordonner) is constituting my series. I have constituted a series of certain points of view. Eh? [Pause] I’ve constituted my series. The point of view is not only this from which a metamorphosis of the object is revealed, but this from which I am able or become able to arrange cases. [Pause] That is fundamentally the point of view: arranging contraries, arranging inverses, arranging opposites.[9] [Pause]
Let’s find an example so that you feel this, because henceforth… There are as many points of view as you would want. Everything depends on the problems considered. In general, I can say that you can only pose a problem if you are able to determine the point of view according to which you might arrange cases corresponding to the problem. Otherwise, you’ve done nothing.[10] What is the point of view that allows you to arrange cases corresponding to the problem? That is, what is going to have us pass into the other aspect, I mean, of the same question. Arranging cases, yes? Sometimes finite, sometimes infinite; sometimes progression, sometimes regression. You are going to create your analysis of cases.
At first glance, says Leibniz, everything happens as a form of an irregular curve, so irregular that one gives up looking for its law. What is the rule? Whatever might the irregularities of a curve, find the point of view, what we earlier called the center of curvature. Finding the point of view in relation to which what earlier appeared to you a crazy irregularity will be revealed as referring to an equation. Finite, infinite, finite, infinite, finite, infinite; regression, progression, regression, progression, regression, progression, etc. It’s not surprising that Leibniz creates in all his mathematics a kind of calculus of problems. And for each family of problem, one will have to find the point of view. An example [is] in astronomy: if you take the planets, you will note an insane rotation. The rotation of planets is such an irregular curve that one must give up on everything, except if you find the point of view. The point of view is in the sun. That works for the planets and for different planetary movements. But if it works for the planetary system, that doesn’t work for the star system. One has to find another point of view.
Is there a universal point of view? [Deleuze shrugs doubtfully] What does that mean? Here it gets complicated. Is God the universal point of view? Perhaps God is the universal point of view, but he doesn’t suppress singular points of view. This is still too complicated for us; we have to leave it aside. Is God a point of view or not a point of view? We cannot answer this frankly; it’s a delicate question. But each time we will have to. When you have a problem, either you will say simply anything, that is, disorder in a pure state; or else you construct your point of view such that you will be able to organize, arrange the cases of the problem. Perhaps you sense that the famous texts like Pascal’s, in his Pensées, on truth, on truth beyond and on this side; what is truth on this side isn’t truth beyond, that’s not simply the sense of a platitude, a tiny skeptical platitude – ah “what we believed true here, they don’t believe it true over there”. That doesn’t mean “to each his own point of view.” Each one having his point of view is the stupidest thought in the world. It’s stupid, in the end; these are frightening platitudes even. “To each his point of view, to each his truth.”
But if the word “perspectivism” in philosophy is an important term, it’s precisely because it never meant that. Furthermore, perspectivism signifies that there is ever but a single point of view from which the truth is stated. That doesn’t mean “it depends on the point of view”; it doesn’t mean “to each his/her own truth”. Perspectivism such as it is realized in Leibniz’s philosophy, then taken up again by Nietzsche – and Nietzsche knows very well what he is doing with it because he renders homage, with his own perspectivism, he renders homage to Leibniz. And then in literature, in any another way entirely, undertaken by Henry James… But all these great perspectivists are again all authors that we can call Baroque. Henry James – I can hardly see a Baroque realization of the novel as fine as that of James.
So what do they have in common? At least [they have] this in common: perspectivism has never been a relativism in the ordinary sense of the term. It’s not “to each his own truth”; [rather] it’s “truth refers to a point of view”. All truth in a domain refers to a point of view onto this domain; point of view is the condition for the possibility of truth; point of view is the possibility for the emergence of truth, of the manifestation of truth. So, above all, don’t think that perspectivism authorizes discussion. [Deleuze smiles] God help us, it does not authorize discussion.[11] In a family of problems, there is only a single point of view. [Deleuze insists on each word] Which one? You will tell me: what is the criterion? It’s quite simple: the one that permits arranging cases. You will tell me: so, there are several points of view. Yes, there are several points of view, notably: the point of view has a site, that is, it runs across a region. So, in fact, in order for me to able to group them together as finite forms, infinite [forms], double point [forms], no double point, etc. – it’s the site of my point of view. Understand? But above all, the relativism “to each his own truth”, and if you truly want perspectivism, [it’s] not even perspectivism of the impoverished; it’s perspectivism of the imbecile. [Laughter] It means that perspective, as much in Leibniz as in Nietzsche and Henry James, strictly means the opposite: how to construct the point of view as a function of which I would even be able to arrange opposites. [Pause]. Good.
And I am saying [that] for each family of problems, you must have a point of view. Point of view is the genetic element. It’s the genetic element. Let’s consider an example in order to be done with my mindless reflections on mathematics. There is something beautiful in Pascal that interested Leibniz considerably. It’s the arithmetic triangle.[12] I am going to tell you about it for those who don’t know about the arithmetic triangle because we will need it, so I am bringing it up here. You need to remember it because I can then avoid going back over it. We are going to undertake a strange operation. You’ll see. [Deleuze looks at the board] — I’ve lost my chalk… no, I’ve got it. [The student on Deleuze’s left gives him a rag to wipe off the board ; Deleuze erases drawing 2] — So, up above… why up above? You place a number 1. Ok? Number 1. So you can take is as the top of the vertex. Then underneath, you put 1 + 1, no, not plus; you put 1 there on the left, and 1 on the right, and that gives you a little arithmetic triangle. And then there [on a third line], you are going to put, staggered, 1, 1. You see? And in between them, you are going to put what? The sum of the preceding level: 1 + 1 which gives you 2. [Pause] Yeh? Good.
Then [on the fourth line] you put 1s staggered again. You see how pretty it is, and there [in the middle] of this new level, you again do the addition, and you put 3, [the sum] 2 + 1 [from the previous level]. You place them between the two. You have [along the left edge] 1, 2, 3, 4 to this fifth level: 1, 3, 3, 1. And then you sense that you could continue at length. [Deleuze begins the fifth level with the number 1] You do the same thing again: you stagger your 1s; you have a triangle of greater and greater length, and there, you put, if you’ve understood well, 1, 3, 4. You place it between [the 1 and the 3 of the level four] and there, [on the right] you will place 4, 3, 1, and in the middle, you will place, if you have understood well, you will place 6, or 3 + 3 [from the previous level]. It’s magic; that’s a magic triangle… and you continue. Her [a student’s] head is in the way, so I can’t go very far… Here, I am going to do it once more [on the sixth level]. This triangle is really beautiful. There [on the left] you will put 5, 4, 1, and there, in the middle, you will put 10, or 6 + 4 [from the previous level], and then [on the right], 10 and 5. So, on this level, you have 1, 5, 10, 5, 1. You continue, you continue like at. [Deleuze sits down] You have a very beautiful triangle that is an arithmetic triangle.
What is the interest [of this]? If you have a sharp gaze, you will notice that at each level there corresponds — except apparently on level one where 1 is all alone — you have overlaid the powers of 2. It’s odd, right? This is known by the name Pascal’s arithmetic triangle. It’s very important since Leibniz will work on this triangle a lot and will develop it as we will see. We are greatly interested in this because he will join a harmonic triangle to it.[13] So, since we know that the concept of harmony is very powerful in Leibniz, we will have to look at this more closely. But we will thus already have a conception of the triangle known as arithmetic.
I said that each level corresponds to powers of 2. The first level 1: 1. If you add it up, that gives you 2 to the first power. The next level is 1 + 2 + 1, 4 [or] 2 second power. The next level: 4 + 4, 8, [or] 2 third power. The next level: 5, 10, 14-15-16 [Deleuze adds the numbers], [2] fourth power. Etc. There [level 5]: 20-30-32, etc. You could continue with this, you could continue to infinity, like that. Fine. What have you done? [It’s] the genesis of the powers of 2. With what condition? You have found the point of view. What is that? Try to understand. We are in the process of getting the sense of many things.
In the end, point of view is quite close to an act. Point of view is an act, and just as Leibniz understands it, as an act. However, at first glance, I wouldn’t have understood [this]. If we hadn’t started from the idea that point of view is an act, all that would be abstract. But understand that here, we are beginning to understand perhaps that concretely, adopting a point of view is an act, if it’s true that the point of view is what arranges cases. It’s what arranges contraries; it’s what arranges opposites. I’d say here that your arithmetic triangle is the invention of a point of view. A point of view on what? On the powers of 2. And I will say, what is point of view? But point of view is the superior [number] 1, the vertex of the arithmetic triangle. So, at the outside, I could say, in order to assimilate it to the powers of 2, that it’s 2 to the zero power, if this expression had any sense. But, after all, it’s this figure that gives a sense, eh?
So, good… All this isn’t finished because you sense that all the problems are rushing in or an entire family of problems is rushing in, notably: can I express any number as a power of 2? [Doubtful shrug from Deleuze] And with what condition? It’s useless to say that this problem alone propels you toward logarithms. Good… But there are many other problems connected here. From this [Deleuze points to the arithmetic triangle] I am just understanding that I can speak of a point of view that permits arranging the powers of 2. There you have typically an arrangement of the powers of 2, just as I can speak of an astronomical point of view that arranges planetary movements; just as I can speak of a point of view in physics, a point of view on an inflection and a site of point of view, etc.
But I am saying that out of this, it’s not simply a question of metamorphoses. It’s a question, a question of anamorphoses. For all this, on metamorphoses and anamorphoses, I refer you, of course, to the research of [Jurgis] Baltrusaijtis, but I am just trying in this way not to say a lot about that because it’s going to… It would be better to see it in books, from engravings, all that. What is an anamorphosis, and what is the difference from a metamorphosis? It’s that metamorphosis is always the passage from form to form; it’s like a connection of forms; it’s the passage from a profile to another profile.[14]
For example, a metamorphosis, but the Baroque world is full of metamorphoses and anamorphoses. I recall, in Fascist Italy, there was a great Baroque tradition, a grand tradition of metamorphoses, in propaganda, in which there were portraits. That struck me because it was impressive, these portraits. There were quite popular. Everyone was buying them. These were portraits. I was fascinated by them because I wasn’t very old and I looked at them and I wondered, how can we explain something like this? But since then, I figured it out: these were portraits on slides. So if you placed yourself in front of the portrait, you have Mussolini; this was the central perspective, where you had Mussolini. You put yourself on the right – you see, it was painted on slides, produced on perpendicular slides, like that. So, when you were in front, you had Mussolini, and then you move to the right and there, you had I don’t remember which officer (maréchal). The slides… On the length of the slides the officer’s head was painted so that, from the right, you saw the officer, and no longer Mussolini. In order to see Mussolini, you had to come back to center. [Laughter] There was the officer on the right, and then to the left, there was another officer, the officer on the left, eh? It astounds me that these haven’t been reproduced recently, especially since… eh? I don’t know… [Laughter] So you understand. Obviously, there’s a problem for the center! [Laughter] But understand that at the point we’ve reached, we have moved beyond the stupidity that would consist in saying, oh well yes, each person has his/her point of view. This isn’t at all, this isn’t at all what’s in a Baroque world. It’s not that the point of view changes all that much. The point of view doesn’t change; the point of view has a site. The point of view’s site, in my triple photo, in my triple image, the point of view’s site is going to be from center to right and to left. Simply, [Pause] the point of view gives me the law of the form’s transformation. There is metamorphosis. And when I was saying “power to arrange cases”, this is just as well [the power] to hierarchize cases, with Mussolini in the center, you see? [Return to film track]
I am saying: when do we speak of anamorphosis? It seems to me that we could reserve anamorphosis… I’m not at all saying that this is… It’s as you like, eh? We could reserve it [anamorphosis] for this, for a case that is deeper than that of metamorphosis, specifically: when there is an emergence of form out of the unformed. It’s no longer the passage from one form to another; it’s how an emergence of form… how there’s an emergence of form out of the unformed.
What does that mean? In appearance, everything is disorder. In appearance, all is disorder. You recognize nothing there; it’s all completely messed up. You have a movement; you have an inflection; you have a series of inflections that are going in all directions, changing centers constantly. You recognize nothing there. Good. But the point of view is what is going to extract a form from this disorder. It’s no longer what passes from one form to another, from one profile to another; it’s what is going to extract any form at all from a non-form. A well-known type of anamorphosis is in the painting by [Hans] Holbein [the Younger], “The Ambassadors”.[15] Under a bookshelf you have a kind of indeterminate stain, really informal, a formless white-ish stain. And from a certain point of view, linked to the lower edge of the painting, from a certain point of view, everything arranges itself. This white-ish stain obviously represents a skull that is the painter’s signature since [the name] Holbein refers to “hollow bone” or “skull”. Good. One could say, you see, both that it’s the point of view initiating an emergence of form starting from what has no form, and also a passage from form to form.
There really is a relativism of point of view; the truth is relative to the point of view. But that has never meant that the truth varies with one’s point of view. That has always meant that the truth… Point of view is the condition of possibility of the manifestation and the constitution of truth in a domain, the domain of the point of view, the domain corresponding to the point of view.
So here we have henceforth [Deleuze turns over a sheet of paper that he seems to use as a guide; he heaves a huge sigh] Aaaaaahhh… On this point, in our problem, we have moved forward. We have indeed outlined this notion of point of view. We have discerned the contradiction not to be made about point of view. Understand? We still have left a final point to look at, good, since the status of the object changes. If the object becomes objectile under the point of view, well then, it’s probable that the status of the subject also changes.[16] The subject is itself a point of view. Point of view is the subject. The point of view is the subject. A subject is a point of view. A subject defines itself through a constitutive act, and this constitutive act is the point of view. Also the subject has a site. It’s the region over which its point of view travels. And in this, perspectivism is fundamentally Baroque. And we should find a name then to emphasize this change of subject’s status no less than the change of the object’s status. The object becomes an objectile insofar as it is affected by the variable curvature or by the group in transformation. We will say about a subject that it becomes a superject [Laughter] insofar… [Deleuze reacts to the laughter] It’s funny, but not very… It’s a superject. Why do I say superject? That is, for the couple object-subject, Leibniz would substitute, but alas without saying so, the couple objectile-superject. If I call upon these terms, it’s uniquely to emphasize that object-subject is going to take on a completely new sense in philosophy with Leibniz.
And… Superject, ok. Here I am only borrowing a term. The idea that the subject would be a superject is an idea that you will find textually and explicitly in the work of a very great philosopher from the start of the twentieth century, [Alfred North] Whitehead. [Deleuze spells out the name] Whitehead is one of the great philosophers of the twentieth century, and who proposed the term superject. Why place Whitehead into Leibniz? For a simple and definitive reason: Whitehead considered himself Leibnizian. So, we have every right, or we are comforted in advance if we propose this pair objectile-superject in order to define the new status of the object and the subject as it appears in Leibniz’s philosophy.
When the object becomes objectile, that is, encounters a group in transformation, the subject becomes a superject, that is, becomes a point of view. [Pause] Hardly have we won this point than everything vacillates. But in what sense can we be called point of view? You, me… For example, we see it well there. [Deleuze turns and points to the triangle on the board] 1 is a point of view onto the generation of the powers of two. Good. The sun is a point of view on planetary movements. Good. But you, me, we are a point of view on the world. Agreed, we are a point of view on the world. We are a point of view on the infinite series of the world, yes, since any point of view is onto a series, the series of powers of 2, series of breaks (coupures). Any point of view, I would say – and this is why we had to call it a superject – any point of view subsumes a series. Which series? The series of transformations through which the objectile passes. Notice that this works out nicely; it’s very satisfying for the spirit. [You] sense it: the world arranges itself. Good. I repeat because it’s so satisfying even, but I repeat : well… yes, no, I no longer know. It doesn’t matter.
I am saying that everything vacillates because… well… If it’s true that every point of view… Ah yes, I wanted to say… If it’s true that every point of view is defined in relation with a series, specifically the series of transformations through which the objectile passes, I can say that each of us insofar as the subject is a point of view on the world, that is, on the series, parenthetically infinite series, of the world…. Good… well, yes, but it’s not simple. We believe to have understood, but we must shift to us, us, us: how is it that we are points of view on the world? What does that mean?
Leibniz seems to guide us. He says, “We are like points of view on the city. Each of us,” you will see, “is like a point of view on the city.” These texts, you find them everywhere in Leibniz, notably in the Discourse of Metaphysics. [Pause. Deleuze consults his notes, then opens a book, finding a sheet of paper that he reads] Here we have a text on this: “As the same town looks different according to the position from which it is viewed.”[17] We are points of view on the city. Notice that this is what is our rapport to the world, our rapport with the world, that is, the rapport that we maintain, we subjects, or superject, with the infinite series of transformation; it’s a little like how a single city is diversely represented.
What does that mean? Does that mean… What does that mean, “we are points of view on the city”? Why didn’t he say, “We are points of view on the countryside”? [Laughter] You will tell me, don’t exaggerate. He could have said, we are points of view on the countryside. I only feel strongly about one thing: showing that he couldn’t say “we are points of view on the countryside”. He could only say “we are points of view on the city”. This is once again why Leibniz is unusually modern. There were already no longer any countrysides, I mean. But why? Well, this is where we have… Are you tired or not? Do I continue or not? [A student suggests a recess, a pause]… But without out moving around, ok? Because you won’t come back if you… [Pause. Deleuze looks at the film crew] Is the sound ok? It’s ok? Yeh? Ok ? Do you want a break ? No ?… In any case, just stay here; just sit and reflect. [Laughter; Pause… A jump in the film editing, no omission]
So this is where we are. All that is very fine: we are points of view on the city. But what does that mean, or rather what does that not mean? At first glance, if I dare say, this could mean: for each point of view there corresponds a form or a profile. If you look at the city from a particular point of view, it has a particular form or it offers you a particular profile. Good. This would be the simplest interpretation; it would be the first interpretation. Only here we are, it’s simple, but it’s impossible. If that’s right… And yet, I am telling you, beware of texts. Leibniz seems to express himself this way. Each subject has a point of view, and to each point of view a profile of the city corresponds. If this is that… No, this cannot be that, it cannot be like that for multiple reasons. But the principal reason why it cannot be like that is because, once again, this is a feeble idea, and Leibniz cannot have a feeble idea. That [first explanation] drops us back into a false perspectivism, of the type “to each his own truth.”
But there’s a more solid reason why that couldn’t be [the interpretation]. Confront the proposition [Deleuze turns toward the board] “I am a point of view on the city,” [He indicated the vertex of the arithmetic triangle] at the vertex ‘S’ of the cone, the point of view. Can I say that the circle corresponds to a point of view? The ellipse, to another point of view? The parabola, to another point of view? Of course not, I certainly cannot say this. You remember? It’s not a question of saying that for each form there’s a corresponding point of view or… I haven’t changed the point of view when I pass from the circle to the ellipse. [Deleuze insists on this next sentence] The point of view is what gives me a hold on the passage from one form to another. It’s what I call the group in transformation. The point of view causes the group in transformation to emerge, that is, the passage from one profile to another. That which corresponds to the point of view is not one particular form or another; it’s the change of form, [Pause] that is, the objectile, the object insofar as it traverses [Pause] its group in transformation. You see? It’s not a question that each form corresponds to a point of view, not a point of view to each form since the point of view allows me precisely to arrange the forms and to pass from one to the other. Here, it is necessary that this be very clear.
So I have no choice, even if Leibniz seems to express himself sometimes this way. You know, Leibniz is astonishing. He said it a thousand times; he measures his texts to the supposed intelligence of those reading him. So, when he wants to be understood by everyone, he speaks quite simply; and then, when he has a small audience, he goes farther. He doesn’t care since, for him, every level symbolizes one another. So it’s a matter of knowing which level is deeper than another. Hence I am saying [that] it’s not a form that corresponds to a point of view. It’s not possible since to every point of view corresponds a change in form, that is, a power of arranging forms and of passing from one form to another. Fine. So, I would say [that] the point of view is what reveals the connection of profiles or the change of form, the passage from one form to another. If there is no point of view, I could never grasp it. If there is no point of view, well, the circle, the ellipse, the parabola, the hyperbola will remain eternally separated each on its own, each form separated from the other form. If I have a point of view, then yes, I can create the synthesis of curves in the second degree. You understand?
But then I have hardly made this first rectification, and I fall back into a difficulty: but why would there be several points of view? And how is it that I am a point of view distinct from you? How is it that each of us is a point of view distinct from other points of view? This is the necessity of a third level, and this gets complicated. [Pause] At first glance, it suffices to find a point of view of a considered domain. But why is there a necessity for a plurality of points of view? I have just shown that every point of view seized onto a series, and probably – there’s no need to pose a lot of hypotheses – and probably an infinite series. If I am a point of view on the world, I grasp an infinite series that is the series of the events of the world, that is, a curve with variable curvature in which each center of inflection, each point of inflection marks an event. Each point of view grasps not this form, not that one, but the infinite series.
But why several points of view? Why is the point of view irreducibly plural? In other words, not only has Leibniz transformed the notion of the subject in philosophy, but he is the first to introduce the plurality of subjects as a metaphysical problem. If you take the thinking subject in Descartes’s work, certainly each of us undergoes the operation of the cogito. But we cannot say that in Descartes, the plurality of thinking subjects is constructed into a metaphysical problem. We can posit this, wonder what the status of thinking subjects in Descartes might be, but to my knowledge, we cannot find an answer to this solution, to wit: the answer that there are several thinking substances. But making the plurality of subjects into a legitimate problem (problème de droit), it’s Leibniz who introduced this problem into philosophy.
So, you understand: I cannot say [that] for each point of view corresponds a form separate from others since, once again, the point of view seizes the metamorphosis of forms. So what distinguishes one point of view from another? What is going to distinguish one of you from me, two points of view? [Pause] We don’t have much choice. These are the beautiful moments in philosophy. You can’t go backward. A same series must indeed be susceptible to variations. A same series must indeed be susceptible to variations, that is, there will be, for each corresponding point of view, a variation on the series.
So good, that gives us something: a series is susceptible to variations. What does that mean, variations of a series? I am not seeking definitive definitions. We are still operating on a kind of intuition, and we are in the introduction to Leibniz, so we cannot ask too much from ourselves. But I am telling myself: let’s use a comparison that is going to… and that entails a great danger, but in the end… Each of us knows that there is a kind of music operating with series. It functions with series of twelve sounds, with the series of twelve sounds. Everyone knows that [Arnold] Schoenberg’s name is linked to this music. Fine. Well, what happens there? [Jump in the film editing, no omission] And what are the variations introduced by Schoenberg into the series of twelve sounds?
First type of variation: you can take fewer that twelve sounds, that is, you don’t take them all. I would say that here, it’s a purely arithmetic variation.
Second variation: a variation called melodic… no, called rhythmic. You keep the same series twice, but you transform the durations. You respect the intervals, but you transform the durations.
Third variation, melodic: you transform the intervals. [Pause]
Fourth variation: you transform the ascending movement into descending movement, and the descending movement into ascending movement. [Pause]
Fifth variation: recurrent movement, that is, you begin at the point where the preceding series ends. You invert the series. Fine.
There you have variations of the series. I would say that a same finite series contains a finite number of variables. I can say that an infinite series contains an infinity of variables.
Do we not have our solution? Specifically, yes, each of us is a point of view on the infinite series of the world. Only here we are: each of us grasps a variable of the series. Each of us grasps a variable of the series. Each time, the entire series is there, fine, but as this or that variation. Here is what it means [to say] “Each of us is a point of view on the city”. Each of us grasps the infinite series of profiles of the city; it’s not at all “to each point of view a profile corresponds.” Each of us grasps the infinite series, but as this or that variation. This will yield an extraordinary figure that you are going to encounter constantly in Leibniz. Each subject, each of us, grasps the entire world as infinite series. There you are. Only as we see, this does not mean that each grasps it clearly. It’s in my own depths – you sense the return of the theme of the fold – it’s in my own depths that I grasp the entire world. Complete this: it’s understood in all this [that] these are things that we cannot yet understand, but we can anticipate them. I am not conscious [of the entire world]. [Pause] It’s in my depths; it’s in a folded form. Fine. No matter.
Each of us grasps the totality of the world as an infinite series. Yes, but each only grasps clearly a tiny portion, such that the clear portion allotted to me is not the same as the clear portion allotted to you. And if there is a plurality of points of view, it’s because there are as many variations of the series as there are clear portions. What I grasp clearly, you only grasp in an obscure manner. Each of us gets even with the other, eh? Each of us gets even with the other (à chacun la revanche). What each of you grasps clearly, the others grasp, yes, but in an obscure way.
Once again, I could say that the clear region is the site of the point of view. The tiny clear portion that I grasp in the world is the site of the point of view. Each point of view has a site, my tiny portion of clarity. It’s a prodigious idea; it’s a fantastic idea, you understand? We are points of view, yes, but do you understand what that means? There’s a tiny domain of clarity – we cannot ask for much more – and then that opens up a whole hierarchy. Do animals have a soul? Well obviously, animals have a soul; these are points of view, animals. There is the butterfly point of view; there is the elephant point of view; there are all of them. These are points of view. So all of them, they do not grasp much clearly. There is a hierarchy of souls, fine, of souls. So a little child? [Doubtful shrug from Deleuze] Yes, a little child, it’s indeed a little child, but in the end…
What do I grasp clearly? Here I don’t want to say too much ahead of time, but you sense that all of Leibniz is engaged in this. What I grasp clearly is finally what relates to my body. Why do I have a body? I don’t have a point of view because I have a body; I have a body because I have a point of view. There is a deduction of the body starting from the point of view. Why do I have a body? Because I only express clearly a tiny portion of the series. Otherwise, I would be a pure soul in the world. I only express clearly a tiny portion of the series. Fine, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. But precisely, that’s what having a body is: I have a body because I express clearly a tiny portion of the series. “Do I express clearly?” is precisely going to be what affects my body. Who grasps clearly the passage of the Rubicon? One single subject: Caesar. Yes, I grasp the passage of the Rubicon, no less than Caesar, yes, no less than him. It’s in me like it’s in Caesar. And in fact, that concerns Caesar’s body. Caesar had to take a longer step in order to cross the Rubicon. That concerns his body. Fine. No matter. That’s what the variations of series are.
I can say, yes, and I have solved my problem. This sentence that seems so inoffensive, “each of us [is] like a point of view on the city,” is in fact extraordinarily complex since it implies, first, that it’s false that a profile or a face on the city corresponds to each point of view; second, since it’s true that every point of view grasps the whole series; and third, since there are no fewer multiplicities necessary for points of view since the whole series is necessarily affected by an infinite sum of variation such that to each point of view, a variation of the whole series corresponds. [Pause]
Understand? So, we are almost done. We can’t take too much more, in any case. You understand me still, because there’s not point for me continuing if you no longer understand? Yes? I can continue? It doesn’t matter to me; I can start up again the next time. So let’s try to continue just a little bit more. So… We are getting close to the goal, eh? We are getting close to the goal. Understand?
My purpose today was to go from inflection to inclusion. Inflection is the characteristic of the variable curvature under the form of infinite series. And I was saying that this is the genetic element of the fold. The variable curvature is the genetic element of the fold. And I continued by saying that if things are folded, this is why God never acts in vain. Eh? It’s a great principle of Leibniz: God always does everything for the best. If God pleated matter, it’s not just for fun; it’s for a final cause. It’s by virtue of a deep finality. If the world is not a straight line, if the world is not rectilinear, it’s not by chance. If mathematics are mathematics of curvature, it’s because the world sings the glory of God, as has been said. And what is the final cause of the fold? I was saying: inclusion. Fine. Folding means placing within. And then we bump into “placing within”. Fine. But placing within what ? So this is going to return to us; this is going to cause us a final difficulty about the point of view since we have to answer now: it’s placing within the point of view.
And good… Ooo la, la, but then there is the view in the point of view; there you have the visible in the point of view. The visible is in the point of view. The visible is included in the point of view. In fact, the infinite series of forms is in the point of view. This inherence, in esse, that is, “being within,” being in the inclusion, how do we show that it belongs to the point of view to contain the visible? Leibniz shows this in the simplest and most infantile way possible. And this infantile manner is not even by itself mathematics although it seems to be, and does not imply differential calculus, but it presupposes the mathematics of differential calculus. For a brief moment, it [the mathematics] borrows, on the other hand, the language that is fully developed in differential calculus.
In fact, to show this, Leibniz will say two things. He will say, first case: you take a right triangle… You take a right triangle… No, not even a right triangle. You take a right angle, excuse me. You take a right angle, like that. [Deleuze makes an ‘L’ gesture in the air] — You see, I am only drawing in the air now; it’s better than going to the board. This way, everyone can see and then immediately forget. — Like that. I draw an arc, the arc of the circle, you see? So I have A: the vertex of the angle, and B-C, the extremities of the arc. I draw an arc that’s narrower inside. It’s still an arc that refers to the right angle. I draw an even narrower one, even narrower. I am getting close to the infinity of the vertex ‘S’, and I say: where does the right angle begin? Still, this is not mathematics. This calls on mathematical language, founded by Leibniz, in fact, but here, it’s quite simple: where does the right angle begin?
[Jump in the film editing; Deleuze is looking into a reference text from which he reads] In 1700, from 12 June 1700,[18] I will quickly read to you: “It is evident that this angle is not only measured by the great arc B-C-D, but also by a lesser F-G, however small it might be, and the opening begins in one word,” the opening of the angle, “begins in one word: from the point A that is the center,” that is the vertex of the angle, “it is also in this very center that the angle is found, such that we can say that these arcs are represented in the center by the relation of the inclination to the center.” This would be very useful to me if we had the time to comment on it, for the relation of the inclination, that is, of the inflection, to the center. You see, this relation of the inclination, that is, of the inflection to the center, is what we had analyzed as today’s departure point, specifically the center of curvature. In other words, the angle is already in the vertex of the angle.
Second text: it’s not only the right angle in the vertex; it’s an infinity of angles, an infinity of angles that are in the point, since you can always take an infinity of angles that coincide through their vertex. And this does not bother us since I remind you that every point of view has a site, that is, a region, a region of displacement. This is why one must not say “to each immobile point of view corresponds a form,” since the point of view is not immobile. The point of view has a site that designates its path (parcours), its limit, the tolerance of its path before arriving at another point of view. Many angles, an infinity of angles, can have a common vertex. [Pause] In other words, the connection of visibles is in the point, or as Serres puts it quite well, when the point becomes point of view, space is in the point.  It’s no longer that point that is in space. This is a kind of revolution that Leibniz brings to bear against Newton. It’s not the point that is in space; it’s space that is in the point. In fact, sense how much this is a new theory of space that will then have an impact on all mathematics after Leibniz and even today, specifically space defined as the order of points of view. This we are still unable to understand, so we will come back to it when we reach our discussion of space in Leibniz. But space can only be the order of points of view to the extent that the point has become point of view. An immediate consequence: space cannot be substance. There is no extended substance. Space is an order; it’s not a substance.
Good, but ok, here, this is at last too much. I am only saying that we have just established the idea that, in fact, point of view is perfectly able to serve as the subject of inclusion. Something is in the point of view, exactly as the infinite series of angles is in the vertex that they have in common. [Pause] Fine. In other words, the world is not only an infinite series; it is included in each point of view, that is, it is included in each of us. It is included in each of us. Yes indeed. What does that mean? This is strange because, understand, this seems to completely contradict the idea of point of view. Point of view seemed to be a point of view by nature onto something outside. There is no longer anything exterior to point of view. Yes there is, there is something exterior to point of view, it’s the other points of view, but nothing else. The city does not exist; we have to go all the way there: the city does not exist outside the points of view onto the city, such that the city is what? It’s not an object since there are no longer any objects; there are only objectiles, the series of profiles. It’s not an object such that the city is what? It can only be the accord of points of view among themselves. The city is identical with the assumed accord of points of view onto the city. The city is in the points of view; it does not exist outside. In fact, the city is always folded; it’s existing within, it’s being included, being included in the point of view. The city is included in the point of view; it does not exist outside the point of view that includes it. Fortunately, outside the point of view, there is the other point of view, the other points of view such that the city is never an object since every object is objectile, but the city is the accord of subjects, or of points of view, that is, of superjects.
What can we call the accord of subjects other than by its true name, God? Well, what? Yes that’s it. It means that the point of view is open onto nothing outside. The point of view is not open onto an exteriority; it is regulated, regulated from within in conformity with other points of view. How do we talk of this? Something like the world is a cinema, the world is an Italian theater, a décor in transformation. The world is a cinema. Or else we may perhaps have to say something worse, even more included because cinema still refers to an outside. Cinema refers to an outside because it is quite obvious that something has to be filmed. So after, the film gets folded, and then it gets unfolded. But there is still a reference to an exteriority. One had to eliminate any references to an exteriority. This is what Leibniz says to us from the start of the Monadology, in a famous text: “the subjects and points of view”, it’s strange, “are without doors nor windows.” He says “monads”, a word that I have not yet used since I would then have to explain it, so I am keeping myself from using it. But I am saying more simply that each subject is without doors nor windows. It grasps the infinite series of the world, but this series is within it.
And why is each subject without either doors or windows? At the start of the Monadology, [Leibniz] tells us: it’s that – you remember? – subjects are Simples (les Simples) in relation to composed matter. Well, that which is simple can receive nothing from outside. Why [is it that] what is simple can receive nothing from outside? For a simple reason: if a Simple received something from outside, it would at that moment form a Composite with what is acting upon it. So, if there is something simple, this Simple can receive nothing from outside, so Leibniz tells us. This is fine, very fine, and logically unassailable. If there is something absolutely simple, it can receive nothing from outside, which comes down to saying that everything must be located within it. It has neither doors nor windows.
So notice this, it’s amazing! This shows well the question of Leibniz’s levels. He comes to speak to us of point of view, first moment, and today we have crossed through all sorts of levels. First level: we are points of view. We understand that there are points of view on the world, yes, on the infinite series of the world. Ah, but be careful: the infinite series does not exist outside each point of view, under one variation or another. Henceforth, there are neither doors nor windows. Everything is in the point of view; the entire visible is in the point of view. So, that leads us to rectify Leibniz’s texts. But we are not the ones rectifying them; he rectifies them himself. We readers of Leibniz, we have to reconcile his two major propositions: “We are points of view on the city” and “We have neither doors nor windows.” There is only Leibniz who understood here as well the stupidity of problems of communication. “We have neither doors nor windows.” So this is not bad. We will see the consequences for communication. This is what Leibniz will call the problem of the communication of substances, once we’ve said that all the units, all the points of view have neither doors nor windows. But then that leads us to correct the notion of point of view. Leibniz began by telling us, in the Discourse on Metaphysics [section 9]: “each subject is like a mirror,” each subject is like a mirror on the world, a mirror of God or of the world. We are in a position to add something: it’s not just any mirror. It’s a concave mirror, and that seems indispensable to me. When Leibniz speaks of a mirror, it can only be a question of a concave mirror because we saw that inflection refers to a center of curvature on the side of concavity, under the vector of concavity. But a mirror assumes a real object. So the metaphor of the mirror is only valid at a certain level.
Second point: he said “We are points of view, points of view on the city,” and he linked the two statements – mirror and point of view – when he says, for example, in a letter [probably a letter to Arnauld]: “Each monad,” no matter, each subject, “is a mirror of the universe according to its point of view.” There you have both together: the metaphor of the mirror and the theme of point of view. Each person is a mirror of the universe according to his point of view. But a point of view implies an outside; it implies a window. It’s useless to tell you that in point of fact, the window looks out on the countryside.[19] That matters a lot because the countryside is always on the side of convexity. The countryside is convex. It cannot be otherwise. So, good. If I have a window, I am looking onto the countryside, yes. Only here we are: I have no window. I am a point of view without a window. So I say: mirror, point of view, but no window. So, let’s consider cinema: I will be like a lined room, with a screen; it’s no longer a mirror, but rather a screen that is needed, where the film, folded, unfolds onto the screen, would play out onto the screen. And each of us would have his/her film, and the accord between the points of view would be the accord of films between each other. This isn’t bad. But that doesn’t work because a film has to be filmed, produced. The screen still doesn’t work. There is still too much reference to an exteriority. The screen still implies a window. We have to close the windows even more.
What’s left for us? So here as well, I am doing what I did earlier with Schoenberg; while begging you not to take advantage and use this badly, I am making a rather arbitrary rapprochement, fine, something like… that explains no reference onto the exterior, so-called digital images (images numériques).[20] Ah yes. What the point of view takes hold of, what the point of view grasps, is what has no existence outside itself. Or if you prefer, images without models, a pure genesis, that is, digital images; or if you prefer, Leibniz’s model, the model that rigorously corresponds to Leibniz: it’s not the mirror, nor the window, nor the screen. Eh? He will pass by the mirror and the window, and he will reject the window. You see, at the start of the Monadology, we have neither door nor window. Good. Neither mirror, nor… This isn’t adequate. None of the three terms is adequate…. Neither mirror, nor window, nor screen. So then what? And what are we draped with, us, if we can use this terms since we are units (unités)? Can we say “the walls of a unit”? What are these closed, opaque walls? Let’s call them information grids (tableaux d’information).
The subject is not open onto the exterior. It is in communication with an information grid that corresponds to it, and data are inscribed onto this grid. And on my very own information grid, certain bits of data are inscribed. On the information grid for one of you, other bits of data are inscribed. Is there a world? Yes, there is a world if the information grids align, if there is a concordance of information grids. Where would this concordance come from? That’s something we cannot know at the moment; we won’t even ask ourselves that. We say: I don’t open my window on the outside; I consult an information grid. So there, I consult within myself. I consult an information grid within myself; I don’t open my window. What is this ? It’s the city. Why is that the city? The city is in our heads, you know? The city, this is marvelous, the city; as has been said, it’s a brain, the city. And it’s not only that: a monstrous brain, a disgusting brain, that is, an information grid. Yes.
This is why I believe that it’s not by chance that the phrase “a point of view onto the city” flows from his pen. A point of view onto the countryside, this is [from] the window. But here, I don’t even open my window in the morning. There is no longer any need for windows. There are people without windows. If I want to know the temperature, I have two ways : the countryside way, I open my window and even risk sticking my arm outside; then pulling it back in, I close the window. Fine. But otherwise? Otherwise, I have a dedicated thermometer, with a wire going inside, and another inside, with two readings; and I look at the thermometer, and I know simultaneously the temperature inside the house and the temperature outside. This is already the start of an information grid. Some bits of digital data are inscribed on my information grid. Neither door, nor window. I have a monologue with myself: “Ah, wow, it’s cold.” But I haven’t opened my window. This is the regime of information grids in the city.
“We are points of view onto the city.” You see what that means now. That means: being a point of view is reading an information grid. Simply, I always have information that the other does not have, fortunately. Each person has his/her own information. All that could create discord. A singular harmony is required for all these kinds of information even to come into a vague concordance. Here too, even at the cost… I am making jumps to try to … Above all, don’t take all this literally; we are in an introduction, so given that, I did not mean that Leibniz is a precursor of Schoenberg, especially not that. I used Schoenberg to make something small understood. I don’t mean to say that Leibniz is the precursor of modern painting, but there is a point that is striking in modern painting, and it has been emphasized – I spoke about it in past years: it’s how the canvas changes status, how the canvas has changed status, that is, how for a long time, the canvas was like or called for a window on the world. [Jump in film editing, no omission] In what we call modern painting, I’m not saying this would be better, but sense that there is no longer a window onto the world. Take what’s known as abstract expressionism which has been something fundamental for launching a painting called contemporary. Fine. Is a painting by Pollock a window on the world? And it’s not only the question of figurative or not figurative. It’s not this that… A line by Pollock – I am taking for those who know what that is – a line by Pollock obviously is not a window onto the world. It’s what? It’s inscribed onto an opaque surface, of what type? Say, this interests me because if there is a painting of inflection, and of inflection with variable curvature, it’s indeed a line by Pollock.[21]
But then, in what sense does that develop? That develops more and more in the form of… The line is inscribed onto a kind of information grid, either a temperature curve [or…]. The question becomes not “what do I see through the window?”, but “what kinds of information does the painting communicate to me?” The painting has become an opaque surface that functions like an information grid. And perhaps, as an American critic has said, in a very lovely article,[22] the person through which that appears the best, where the genius of painting appears the most profoundly, is Rauschenberg. No doubt, it’s with Rauschenberg that a new status appears. I am not at all saying that he invents it all at once; it’s once again because it was Pollock and all those who preceded Pollock… One would have to create an entire history of this mutation of the painting’s status. But you find yourself before a famous painting by Rauschenberg that shows a line of inflection on the opaque layer that covers the painting. Or sometimes he creates forms from cut-up newspapers. These are not at all collages, understand: he uses printed matter as backing. One can no better underscore the painting as an information grid. And this is how he creates his painting, a kind of infinitely sinuous line, a line of infinite inflection with numerical data, and numerical data in all the senses. An information grid, in fact, no longer knows high or low, right or left. A window, yes, a window has a high and a low, a right and a left. One window refers to a horizontal man; an information grid no longer refers to a horizontal man, that is, there is liberation of the point of view in relation to any frontality. Good, and this painting I am thinking of, the famous one by Rauschenberg, as its line and its numbers, and from it emanated a pictorial power in a pure state, and leaves us with this question: “What information does this painting convey to me?” So I would say that here, we have something like an approximation of a realized Leibnizian world.[23]
In what sense? I just wanted to say, there, in what direction we have today fulfilled our short portion, the task we gave ourselves, specifically: the last time – I really want you to sense our progress, how slow it is; you have to sense this – the last time, once again, we had been on the first floor of Baroque architecture, not the lower floor, but the upper floor.[24] We’ve moved from inflection, from curvature to the infinite series. And today, we’ve moved from inflection to inclusion. Inflection included itself, is included in what? Inflection is included in a point of view. On what condition? On the condition that point of view be grasped without reference to a supposed exteriority and only with reference to other points of view, that is, that the model not be the window, but the information grid, as an information grid, a play between terminals, whatever you like. You can act stupidly (déconner), you can say whatever since, from the moment that you don’t insist on it, there’s no point doing so. Leibniz’s fundamental statement, to support all this: there is no window. So I believe myself to have answered the question: in what sense can we consider that inflections are included in points, in points defined as points of view?
So go reflect on all this and tell me about it next time. And then, I stared into the camera, eh! [Deleuze smiles; someone says something inaudible to which he responds] I hope so, I hope that I didn’t ruin it by looking into the camera… So there we are; thank you very much. [Deleuze begins to relax, rolling his shoulder, visibly wasted, and he emits tiny groans, saying] Tired…
A student: It’s the heat that does that do you.
Deleuze: The heat… the filmmaking… [The students start leaving; there is a jump in the film editing, and we see Deleuze nearly alone in the classroom, dressed in hat and coat, and he says] This was all cinema! [Someone suggests something inaudible, and he answers] You want me to fall? [The camera follows Deleuze as he leaves the room] Fine, so long! [He turns left into a corridor, and then leaves the building onto the street, and says] There we are, it’s recess. That’s it! [Jump to black] [Audio: 2:31:27; Video: 2:28:04]

Lecture 4, 16 December 1986: Review: Inherence to Inflection, and the Monad and the Individual
So much has happened that we hardly recognize each other. I don’t know really what you remember in what we are doing. Once I’ve said that the student movement must not lose its strength, among the secondary activities, it’s suggested that you should create a petition addressed to the University president to propose the hypothesis: are the bars that have been installed compatible with security? In the event that a fire should break out here, how would we get out? Moreover there is the matter of keys, of locked doors, open not closed, then not open, all this detracts greatly from your intellectual efforts. So a petition is needed, a very polite one. But the security bars, think about this! [Pause] Ok. In the preceding meetings which were very poorly attended,[2] we talked about what happened, so I don’t think we have to return to this, unless someone has a declaration to make? Let me restate, but it’s obvious for everyone, what really matters is that this student movement should continue, that it not give up. That’s why I think all the students’ efforts are very important, at the level of each university in order even to create the elements of a counter-project for the university organization. The professors could also get a bit involved. Ok.
So let’s continue, amazed already to be at the fourth meeting. Next week vacation begins, from 20 Dec to 6 Jan. And as usual, the sixth is a Tuesday, every time we come back from break it’s Tuesday, so we will meet on Tuesday, 6 Jan. Today I would like to make every effort to finish the first part, with the option of abridging some things, which is not a problem, and I’d like to start with some numbered remarks. And fine, you will see yourselves, I am trying to create short summaries and state some things that I have not yet said in order to bring you back into the focus of our work. My first remark, you recall, is what this introductory part consists of, and I told you, it’s very simple: Leibniz’s Baroque philosophy unfolds on two floors. What I did not say is that, already in this idea of a world of two floors, there is something that must impress us because that [idea] engages philosophical reflection in general. Specifically, does this two-floored Baroque world, which I will not return to, engage all philosophical reflection because, perhaps it is an important moment for a problem that is troubling metaphysics, at that moment, and had been for a long time, notably the famous problem of two worlds, the intelligible world and the sensible world?
Doesn’t Baroque philosophy, or more precisely, doesn’t Leibniz, by presenting us with a two-floored world, belong to this tradition all the while revising it quite profoundly? How are these floors distributed? In the history of philosophy, they had already undergone many changes before Leibniz. So we will be interested in knowing in what way the disjunction, the distinction in Leibniz’s works develops a very profound revision of the distinction of two worlds. All the more so since we saw what these floors consisted of, and I told you that the Baroque world is the world of the fold extending to infinity, and that initially is differentiated and doubled into two kinds of fold.
On one floor we have the pleats (replis) of matter, and on the other floor the folds (plis) in the soul; pleats of matter and folds in the soul. And the floor with pleats of matter is like the world of the composed, of the infinitely composed, matter never ceasing to be refolded and unfolded, and on the other floor, it’s the floor of the Simples [les Simples]. The souls are simple, hence the expression: the folds in the soul, in the soul. Thus we saw a vague program of study of the pleats of matter, and then we started into an analysis of what the folds in the soul mean.
Second remark. To answer this question of what the folds in the soul are, we set off in search – the two floors have to communicate – in search of an ideal genetic element, an ideal genetic element of the pleats of matter.
In an earlier meeting, we studied the pleats of matter, why matter is a power (puissance) that never ceases refolding, and then we passed on to the hypothesis of an ideal genetic element of the pleats of matter. And no doubt, if there is such an element of the pleats of matter, what is it? It is the variable curve or the inflection. (Figure 1)[3] For Leibniz, the world is fundamentally affected by a curve. We have seen the importance of this, from the viewpoint of the physics of matter, but beyond the physics of matter, in mathematic and in mathematical idealities (idéalités). The mathematical ideality is a curve, the curve of the universe. This is a very profound Leibnizian theme. You recall that this did not surprise us, to notice that inflection, or the variable curve, goes to infinity. I’ll remind you briefly that we saw this through the very properties of the irrational number, or the “deaf” number as they said in the seventeenth century; the irrational or deaf number is, at once, inseparable from the curve on the straight line, and also engenders – still a genetic element — an infinite series. So the variable curvature, or the inflection, goes to infinity. The idea of an infinite series would define one the most important chapters of Leibniz’s mathematics.
Third remark: from the inflection, that is, the variable curvature, from the inflection to the point of view. No doubt, the concept of inflection already had a very great characteristic originality in Leibniz’s philosophy, so grant him as well that the introduction of point of view as a philosophical concept must have had an extreme importance for philosophy. From inflection to point of view: why? Because the variable curvature refers to centers. Centers of curvature, on the side of the concavity of the curve. (Figure 2)[4] So the variable curve is inseparable from vectors of concavity. And the center, understood as center of the variable curvature, what is it? It is the vertex, it is the point of view. What does ‘vertex’ mean? It means that it is the locus of points where the tangents meet at each point of the variable curve. You remember? [Deleuze writes on the board] I would say that such a center of the curvature is a point of view on the portion of the curve defined by a vector of concavity. And that is what was essential. I want you to understand, independently of anything very scientific or philosophical, how one passes precisely, how naturally, it’s a kind of deduction that I want to propose to you. How one passes from the idea of inflection or variable curvature to that of point of view.
I tried to show you in what sense this was very important — and in his book on Leibniz [Le système de Leibniz], Michel Serres showed it perfectly — in what sense it was very, very important that, ultimately, for Leibniz, the substitution occurred from the center conceived as center of configuration of a regular figure, for this notion of center was substituted that of point of view. In the center of the circle is substituted the vertex of the cone, the vertex of the cone is the point of view. So as if through a necessary linkage we pass from the idea of variable curvature to the point of view or vertex. For the geometry of the center is substituted a geometry of vertices, a geometry of points of view. Is that ok? Is it clear?
Fourth remark, but once again, this is valid for all of today’s remarks, these are the steps of a deduction. Recall well, by virtue of the earlier remark, how we have passed from the idea of inflection to that of point of view. That’s what seems fundamental to me. Realize that if we had started by proposing Leibniz’s notion of point of view, one could have said some extremely interesting things, of course, but we would not have understood how we got there. When a philosopher discovers new concepts, it’s not suddenly, all at once, in his head. He got there through all sorts of problems. The universe first had to be affected by a curvature, and more, by a variable curvature. It’s an elastic world; this is Leibniz’s physics of elasticity. The universe had to be affected by a variable curvature so that, afterward, the notion of point of view might really be concretely founded. Consider how we pass from inflection to point of view. The center of the variable curvature is no longer a center, in the sense of center of a circle, that is, the center of a regular configuration; it’s a site, it’s a vertex. It’s a vertex as a function of which I see, that is, it’s something that makes itself visible.
Fourth remark [Deleuze repeats this number, continuing the same point]: But what is a point of view? First characteristic, it seems to me, a point of view is always in relation with a variation or a series. [Pause] Moreover, it is itself empowered to place into a series, the power of arranging (puissance d’ordonner), the power of arranging cases. We saw it in the simple mathematical examples, the vertex of the cone is a point of view because it has the power of arranging curves to the second degree. Circle, ellipse, parabola, hyperbola. The vertex of Pascal’s arithmetic triangle, you remember that lovely triangle? I hope so, but it doesn’t matter… The vertex of Pascal’s arithmetical triangle is the power of arranging the second degree powers. This is the first characteristic of the point of view.
The second characteristic of point of view: above all, it does not mean everything is relative, or at least it means that everything is relative on condition that the relative becomes absolute. What do I mean? I mean that the point of view does not indicate a relativity of what is seen, that follows from the preceding characteristic: if the point of view is really the power of arranging cases, power of placing phenomena into series, point of view is then, suddenly, the condition for emergence or manifestation of a truth in things. You will find no truth if you do not have a determined point of view. It’s the curvature of things that requires the point of view. One can say nothing else; this curved universe of Leibniz, one has to start there. If not, everything stays abstract. In other words, there is no truth if you have not found a point of view [where truth] is possible, that is, from which a particular kind of truth is possible.
It’s in this way that the theory of point of view introduces into philosophy what I call a perspectivism. When Nietzsche declared himself close to Leibniz, it’s precisely in the name of such a perspectivism, and in Nietzsche’s as well as Leibniz’s work, perspectivism will not mean to each person a different truth but will mean point of view as condition for the manifestation of the true. But for another great perspectivist, the novelist Henry James, point of view and the technique of points of view never meant that truth is relative to each person, but that there is a point of view starting from which chaos is organized, in which the secret is discovered.
Third characteristic of point of view: henceforth, point of view is not at all a frontal perspective that would allow a form to be seized in its best conditions. Point of view is fundamentally Baroque, but why? This is because point of view is never a means (une instance) through which one can seize a form, but point of view is a means (une instance) through which one seizes a series of forms: passages from one form to another, or as anamorphosis: passage from chaos to form. This is the very character of Baroque perspective.
Last characteristic of point of view: point of view is affected by a fundamental pluralism; whoever says point of view says plurality of points of view. Point of view is inseparable from a pluralism, indeed, but in which sense? Notice that in this, we are going to have a little difficulty: the point of view is essentially multiple. That all philosophy of point of view is pluralist, we know in any case that, yet again, this certainly does not mean “to each person a different truth”. That’s not right, that’s not what founds the pluralism of point of view. Once again, on the contrary, we saw that it’s the power of arranging and of creating series, of creating series of a multitude of forms. Point of view opens onto an infinite series.
Well yes, but still… This is a bit disturbing. Why? If the point of view opens onto an infinite series, — that is, let’s say at an extreme, if every point of view is [opened] onto an infinite series, that is if every point of view is [opened] onto the world – this is not surprising since the world is affected by a curvature, so that point of view is then [opened] onto the world – I am trying to speak to you in very ordinary terms about what Leibniz presents in an elaboration of concepts that’s much more. If any point of view is [opened] onto the world, why are there several points of view? If point of view is an infinite series, why are there several points of view? Perhaps we are going to have difficulties in accounting [for this]. However, we still must maintain: there is an essential plurality of points of view. Perhaps my figure 2 indicates this enough: if the world is in inflection, and point of view is defined on the side of concavity, there is evidently a distribution of points of view around the point of inflection. So there are necessarily several points of view. I am sure of two things. As a result of this brief remark, I am certain that any point of view opens onto an infinite series, and at an extreme, onto the series of series, that is, onto the world; and I am certain also that there are several points of view. The little difficulty is, yet again, that by virtue of the first characteristic, point of view opens onto the infinite series, that is, onto the world. Why is there not a single point of view that it would simply be necessary to discover and to rise to? Well no, there are necessarily several points of view because of the curvature, the inflection, the variable curvature. We will have to arrange that. One senses that there is something needing to be arranged. Still, though, an essential pluralism remains the final noteworthy characteristic, for the moment, of point of view.
This was my fourth remark. This fourth remark provided elements for defining what one must understand by Baroque perspective. As a result of these four initial remarks, I say we have passed from the variable curvature, or inflection, to point of view.
Fifth remark. We are going to pass from point of view to inclusion or inherence, a constant word for Leibniz, in esse in Latin. What is this in esse? It’s “being in”, being included in. It was not enough to go from the variable curvature or inflection to point of view; we have to go from point of view to inclusion and inherence. This is the object of the fifth remark. [Interruption] — Come in… [Laughter] and please close the door — So that our total object is to show how we necessarily pass from the variable curvature or inflection to inclusion or inherence. For the moment, my fifth remark is: how do we pass from point of view to inclusion? I told you that Leibniz often adopts the following theme: you can always construct a right angle in a circle. [Deleuze writes on the board while speaking] This is not the center of the circle, it’s the vertex; in the Leibnizian technique of translation of centers into vertices, it’s the vertex of a right angle. Where does the right angle begin? The closer you get to the circle arc of the vertex itself, the more you notice that the angle is already a right angle. At most, the fact that this angle is a right angle is included in S, I included in the vertex, is included in the point of view. You will tell me that, still, this is a bit weak, but that’s what I’m looking for, things that really go without saying. In a certain way, the angle is already right in the point S such as it is defined? Good.
Or, I would say: the variable curvature is in the curvature center that corresponds to it (figure 2). Why? Precisely since this center precisely is the locus of points where the tangents meet at each point of the variable curvature This is a strange idea; so now this is what must be said: the visibility, or if you prefer that which is manifest, the phenomenon. Or if you prefer, the curve. The visible curve is located in point of view onto the curve. The visible curve is as if in the center of the curvature, the visible curve is located in the point of view onto the curve. Good.
Reading philosophy means doing two things at once: it means being very attentive to the linkage of concepts, that’s what philosophical reading is; but there is no philosophical reading without there being a non-philosophical reading. And the non-philosophical reading, without which the philosophical reading remains dead, provides all kinds of sensible intuitions that you must emerge within you, but extremely rudimentary sensible intuitions, and because of this, are extremely lively.
The visible is included in point of view. What does that mean? If we try to continue from this, what sensible intuition is located underneath this, let’s begin again with our variable curvature. Our variable curvature is the fold, or the genetic element of the fold. We saw that matter ceaselessly folds back onto itself, more generally the world is folded. Let me ask why something is folded? Why is it folded? This comes back to Leibniz, he is famous for asking a reason for each thing; it’s a philosophy that he himself presents as a philosophy of sufficient reason. Everything has a reason. What he understands by reason, we will see, but we cannot start from there, it’s too abstract. Not that it’s too difficult, but just that at this point, it would make Leibniz die. We’d have a kind of death of Leibniz. You can only make a philosopher live through the non-philosophical reading that you undertake. Such that the most philosophical of all philosophers, is in some ways the least philosophical of all philosophers, and in the history of philosophy, there was the most philosophical of philosophers who was also the least philosophical of philosophers, that is, accessible to non-philosophers, that’s Spinoza. We’re out of luck, we are talking about Leibniz, and here comes Spinoza: the author that would be susceptible to an extremely complex philosophical reading, and at the same time, the most violent non-philosophical reading. Before it was ever Nietzsche, it was Spinoza. But let’s say it was also Leibniz.
So why would something be folded? At the level of non-philosophical sensible intuition, I am saying something very simple. I was saying in the last class, before we left each other for such a long time (18 November), I don’t know if things are folded. Leibniz says yes, the universe is affected by a curvature, but why? Why is it useful to be folded? Why is being pleated (replié) useful? If things are folded, it’s in order to be placed inside. That’s an answer at least. — [Interruption; Deleuze apparently looks at an envelope] Ahh, this is the petition for the (university) president that I will read to you later. — I was telling you, well yes, things are folded only to be enveloped. Things are folded in order to be included, to be placed inside. This is very curious. That is, the fold – here we have some non-philosophy — refers to the envelope. The fold/folded thing is what you place in the envelope, in other words: the envelope is the reason for the fold. You would not fold if it weren’t for placing in an envelope. The envelope is the final cause of the fold.
I’m translating into philosophical concepts. Inclusion is the reason for inflection. Inflection is the reason for curvature. Things had to be folded in order to be placed inside. We have not finished our reflection. What is folded – I am going very slowly because I want you to understand as we proceed – what is folded, or if you prefer, what is curved, since inflection appeared as the genetic element of the fold, what is folded, or inflected, or curved by a variable curvature, through this [it’s] enveloped in something. So here’s the first thing that I would like you to grant me. So if you ask me, why, well, just stop, stop asking why. But stop, stop to ask why. One mustn’t ask why; one must ask, “is that ok?”  It’s Leibniz’s world.
So, fine. What is folded is necessarily enveloped in something; otherwise it would not be folded. What is folded is only folded, what is curve is only curve to be enveloped. To envelop, in Latin, is involvere or implicare. Implicated, enveloped, is the same thing. Implicare, what is that? It is the state of the fold that is enveloped in something, that is implicated in something. There’s great beauty in all that, as beautiful as a work of art. And in relation to a work of art, it has an advantage which is that, in fact, it’s true. [Laughter] It is true that things happen like that.
Let’s continue. If you’ve understood me to this point, I’m beginning…  What’s folded, plicare, also means implicare, what is folded is placed inside something, is included in something. What’s folded is folded only in order to be within something. In other word, therefore, a little step forward: what is folded does not exist outside that which includes it, what implies it, what envelops it. What is folded does not exist outside that which envelops it. Let’s continue step by step. What is folded does not let itself be unfolded except ideally. Unfolding what is folded is possible, but it’s an operation of abstraction. What is folded exists only as enveloped within something. If you develop this something, it’s possible, but it’s an abstraction. You make an abstraction, at that moment, from the envelope. In other terms, what is folded exists only in its enveloper [enveloppant]. But then, what progress have we made? This progress is complicated in the fifth remark.
I would say, in this fifth remark, we can conclude: what is folded not only refers to a point of view, — this was the object of the preceding remarks, — what is folded refers to a point of view, but – my fifth remark — what is folded does not refer only to a point of view, but is necessarily enveloped in something that occupies the point of view. There we have not finished assessing the progress we’ve made. What is folded refers to a point of view, but moreover, is necessarily implicated, is necessarily enveloped, implicated within something that occupies the point of view. We have not finished assessing these little bits of progress since you certainly sense that when we said earlier “the visible is included, enveloped in the point of view,” it was an approximation; that did not entirely work, that it was by approximation that I can say the right angle is in the vertex. But also I am no longer saying that; it was a way of speaking, we had no other at that moment. Now we can, in fact, specify a bit: by saying that it was almost that [the right angle is in the vertex], but not quite that. For what is folded is not enveloped in the point of view; what is curved or folded, is enveloped within in a something that occupies this point of view, but henceforth there is something that occupies the point of view, and that is what we have not discussed.
And this something that occupies the point of view, henceforth, you will grant Leibniz that at once he can tell us, by commodity and to go more quickly, he can identify it with point of view itself, and likewise distinguish it, on the contrary, from the point of view. Thus I conclude this fifth remark by saying that we find ourselves now faced with two propositions that have a relation of progression with each other. First proposition: what is folded necessarily refers to a point of view since inflection, or variable curvature, refers to a point of view. Second proposition, what is folded is necessarily enveloped within something that occupies the point of view.
The sixth remark would have for object to specify what this progression consists of. [Pause] Up to there, ok? No problems? I’d really like for you to take from this, if that suits you, a method for your reading. I insist on that, on this necessity. What I am in the process of doing is nearly an operation for de-philosophizing. I really think that the only completely philosophical reading occurs if you make it coexist with a non-philosophical reading. That’s why philosophy is not at all something for specialists; it’s both something for specialists, and at the same time absolutely a non-specialist thing. Both need to be maintained at the same time. A good philosophy is eminently a specialist thing since it consists in creating concepts, but it’s fundamentally a non-specialist thing because concepts are truly sketches, sketches of sensible intuitions.
So I would like to insist on… Here’s a new example. Inflection was overtaken by the idea of point of view, and now the idea of point of view is overcome by a something that occupies the point of view. I would say of this something that it’s something enveloping, something implicating. The fold is implicated in the implicating. We know in advance that this enveloping is, in general, the subject. The subject, or according to Whitehead’s words — (we will have to discuss this; we should have gotten there, but the circumstances haven’t… – there’s a kind of parallelism Leibniz-Whitehead – the subject, or as Whitehead says, the superject, it’s the subject that envelops, the superject that envelops, that implicates. What does it envelop? It envelops what is folded. What is folded? We saw that there were reasons to call it, not object, but objectile, since the objectile was the object insofar as it described variable curvatures or a variable curvature. So grasp, philosophically, [that] if we jump from one reading to another, it’s indeed the first time that a philosopher defines the subject in that way as a point of view, a vertex, a superject.
That’s really curious: the subject is what comes to a point of view. And I say that, on one hand, Leibniz will act as if subject and point of view are the same thing, and likewise he will be very formal, very precise, and he will tell us that point of view is the modality of the subject, that one cannot say any better that the subject must be defined independently of point of view, it comes to a point of view, the point of view is its inseparable mode, but it’s not the point of view that defines the subject. I get the impression there that Leibniz’s commentators really don’t see clearly this progression and are quite satisfied with the notion of point of view in order to define the subject. And this is not possible. The subject really must… Why? Because the subject is not point of view, it’s enveloping. So it has a point of view; of course, it has a point of view, but to speak in a learned way, in its constitution it is not point of view. Resulting from its constitution is that a subject comes to a point of view and is inseparable from a point of view, but the point of view is not its very constitution.
In other words, what is our progression? First, I say that point of view is a point of view onto an infinite series, that is, the point of view is a point of view onto the constituted series, the infinite series constituted by the states of the world. That’s what point of view is. It bears on the infinite series of the states of the world. You see that in my first [upper] floor, my first floor above matter, is perhaps sketched something like different little floors. I’d say that if I limited myself to point of view, I remain in a scale of perception; it’s the world of the percept. The point of view looks onto the infinite series in the states of the world. It’s like the manifestation of visibility, it’s the percept. [Pause] But moreover, I say: the world, the series of the world, the infinite series of the world is enveloped in something that comes to the point of view, that is, is enveloped in the subject.
At that point, notice that the status of the world has changed, no longer exactly as earlier the infinite series of the states of the world because what is enveloped in the subject is what? By nature, it’s what we call the predicate, or if you prefer, the attribute. The infinite series of states of the world has now become the infinite series of predicates of the subject, infinite series of predicates of a subject that envelops them. We have passed from the infinite series of states to the infinite series of predicates or attributes. Indeed, if the infinite series of states of the world is in the subject, is enveloped in the subject, the states of the world are also the predicates of the subject, the attributes of the subject. All of that involves a lot of things, but we won’t bother with that yet; notably, we won’t bother yet with the formidable and beautiful question: what is an attribute of the subject?!
I will simply say: well ok, if the states of the world are enveloped in the subject, the states of the world must necessarily be the predicates of the subject that envelops them. You see again the tiny progress: we are no longer in the domain of visibility. So what domain are we in? We have passed from visibility to legibility (le lisible). We have passed from visibility to legibility. From a certain point of view, I see the world, but within me, I read it. Hence this very charming text by Leibniz, Monadology, paragraph 36… no, not that, it’s paragraph 61, I’ll read it to you:
“A soul” – that is, a subject — “can read in itself only what is distinctly represented.” It matters little what that means, the text. We are not yet able to provide commentary on it, but we can note that Leibniz does not say and will never say – well, don’t ever say “never”, one has to be careful — when he is speaking rigorously, he will never say – although he occasionally speaks less rigorously to go faster – he will never say that the soul sees into itself; he will say that the soul reads into itself. What it [the soul] envelops are states of the world as predicates of the subject.  And the soul reads its own predicates at that same time that under the point of view where it is located, it sees the states of the world. That gets complicated, but it was worth the effort because we are, in fact, no longer in the domain of the percept at the level of the envelopment. At the level of the point of view, we are in the percept, but on the level of the subject-predicate envelopment, we are in the concept. We are in the concept. With one qualification, which is evidently fundamental: on the condition of conceiving the concept as individual. The subject is individual. Why? Precisely because it does not exist without coming to a point of view. In other words, what is a subject? It’s a concept, it’s a notion, and each time that Leibniz says “subject,” you should correct him by substituting “notion”, it’s the notion of the subject, in Leibniz, always. And what is a notion of subject? It’s an individual notion, he says. In other words, the concept extends all the way to the individual. Moreover, the individual is the concept, it’s the notion. This is strange; there we are still absolutely incapable of understanding. But it’s interesting to note what will need to be understood for the future. I can say that Leibniz is without doubt the ancient philosopher, or relatively ancient, who was the most modern from the point of view of logic.
If we ask Leibniz what a subject is, he will answer that it’s what is indicated by a proper noun. You know the extent to which, in modern logic since Russell, the theory of proper noun has had importance. We will see it in detail later. Leibniz is the first to tell us that the real name of an individual substance, the true name of the subject, is a proper noun. And it’s without doubt with Leibniz that a true logic of proper nouns begins.  What is a subject? It’s Caesar, Adam, you, me. The subject is individual. Immediately one steps back, saying, no, it’s the individual notion of each of us because only the individual notion encompasses predicates. What are the predicates that we encompass? All the states of the world! In other words, what comes to a point of view? What comes to a point of view is the subject understood as an individual notion. What comes to a point of view is what is indicated by a proper noun. I see from a point of view, and I read in the subject. Seeing and reading. Percept and concept. [Pause]
In other words, summarizing this remark rapidly – this was my focus throughout this entire introduction and in all of the preceding meetings — we have indeed passed from inflection to inherence. But at what price? At the price of discovering that not only does inflection refer to point of view, but that point of view refers to something that came to occupy this point of view; the something that occupies this point of view, let us call it: a soul. It’s a soul; a substance, that’s a substance; a superject if we speak like Whitehead and not like Leibniz, since the word is Whitehead’s; an individual notion, a proper noun. [Pause]
There is a huge difficulty that we dropped completely; don’t be surprised not to understand what is currently incomprehensible: what precisely is a predicate or attribute, of this substance or subject? We just saw that to the extent that there is envelopment, the states of the world became predicates of the individual subject. There is no subject except as individual, and that is something completely strange in philosophy. Because before the others, what had been debated in the question of knowing in what sense the soul was individual, not individual, [and] what were the consequences of all this? Leibniz arrives calmly and tells us: every subject is individual, and moreover, the concept extends to the individual and exists only by going to the individual.
None of that goes without saying, but these are difficulties to be resolved later. We are not quite ready to resolve them now. So we proceed to the extent that we are able to resolve, hence my seventh remark. I am taking a short break; was the sixth remark clear? You just have to grasp the necessity of passing from point of view to inherence, that is, to inclusion, that is, to the idea of something individual that comes to occupy the point of view and that, henceforth, encompasses, envelops the infinite series. I sense that you have understood quite well since you are indicating nothing; you have inscrutable faces. Leibniz would say that in your souls — and we see clearly the difference between point of view and soul — in your soul where you read perfectly, at first glance, you see nothing at all… in your soul. In the end, the soul is essential. Fine.
Seventh remark, from which, at least, we must know what we are able to understand. We saw what we were not yet able to comprehend, but in the seventh remark, there is a whole series of texts by Leibniz that are found all over, and that now no longer pose a problem for us. First, and we saw this in the previous meeting, the mirror theme: each subject is a mirror of the world. That really is the language of visibility. Moreover, Leibniz adds, each subject is mirror of the world from its point of view. You see that he does not confuse subject with point of view, that is, the subject “mirror of the world” through the mode of its point of view, from the point of view it comes to occupy. We were just insisting that one must understand mirror as a concave mirror. Everything that precedes justifies this, that introduction or adjunction of concavity.
Second point: it’s only a metaphor, and we must get beyond this metaphor. Why get beyond it? Because it settles into the point of view, that is, it sits in the middle of the road. We mustn’t say that each subject is a mirror on the world, because that would seem to suggest that the world exists in itself. Yet, recall that it exists only as folded, that is, it exists only as enclosed in each soul, it exists only as enveloped in each soul or object. Henceforth one must say that, as I was suggesting the last time, rather than a mirror on the world, the subject is a screen on which a film is shown. But as we have noticed, that was still insufficient, since a film has been made and refers to an exteriority, even assumed. From which we invoked rather an opaque table, an opaque table of information where data is registered, without reference to any exteriority.
The world is enveloped in each subject and exists only as enveloped in each subject. This is the sense in which the Monadology will tell us: subjects, individual substances are “with neither door nor window.” They receive nothing from outside. You see why they receive nothing from outside since everything they have, everything they read or everything that happens to them, they envelop it, they include it. In other words, the world does not exist outside of subjects that include it, the world does not exist outside subjects that envelop it. [Pause] And nearly as a symbol of Leibniz, I proposed to you the last time a famous painting by Rauschenberg, where everything we need is located, that is, the surface of the painting as an information surface, as a table of information that one must imagine being slightly concave and a ciphered variable curve is inscribed on it. In fact, this is the representation of a Leibnizian world. You see that we have passed onward, causing us only to start over another level that we just completed.  In this seventh remark, we have passed from texts by Leibniz in which he told us that the subject, the individual substance is mirror on the world, to the other kind of deeper text: the individual subject envelops the world; the world does not exist outside subjects that it envelops. Outside subjects that envelop it, that moves us forward again.
Eighth remark. For now the time has come to resolve a difficulty: why [are there] several points of view, why several subjects? Why wouldn’t there simply be a single subject that would come to a point of view, and whose point of view would be and would carry onto the infinite series of states of the world, and would thus envelop the totality of predicates; and would have for attribute a term: the infinite series of states of the world; a single subject that would be God? In a certain way, this would be Spinoza, a single substance, God, that encompasses, that contains, that includes all modifications, that includes all constitutive modifications of the world, the infinite series of constitutive modifications of the world. This is just to indicate the extent to which Leibniz insists on the plurality of subjects and on the plurality of points of view. In fact, we go from one to the other, from the plurality of points of view to the plurality of subjects.
But yet again, if it is true that a point of view grasps hold of the infinite series of the world, or (and it’s the same thing) if it is true that the subject includes the world, envelops the world — it’s strange! — Why several points of view? I remind you that in our previous meeting, I tried to propose an answer to you, which is: the infinite series is essentially susceptible to an infinity of variations. [Pause] The variations of a series, we’ll have to come back to them, the variations of a series. I was telling you [that] we have to conceive of them in every manner: rhythmic variations, melodic variations, opposite movements, when the ascendant becomes the descendant and vice versa, retrograde movements when you begin at the ending, and you obtain another series. So there is an infinity of variations of the infinite series.
So what must we say, that each subject responds to a variation? Without doubt, notably there are not two subjects that begin the infinite series with the same term, nor that end it the same way. That’s why there is necessarily an infinity of subjects. But then there is also a reason, which is: ok, each subject envelops the infinite series, the infinite series of the world, but each subject is defined by a region of this series, the region that it can clearly and distinctly read. I express the world, or if you prefer, I envelop it, I express the world in the manner of a mirror, and I envelop it in the manner of a subject. And then you as well — there is no reason — we all express the world. Well, fine, only that we do not clearly express the same portion. Each subject has a finite capacity for clearly reading, [and] the rest is what? We must say that each subject is, literally, dyslexic, for the entire series. You see who this great reader is. The great reader of the world is God.
But we, individual subjects: you’ll tell me: but God is an individual as well; sure, God’s an individual, but that is going to cause us problems, the sense in which it’s an individual, and the sense in which we too are individuals, but we haven’t gotten there yet. God envelops the whole series of the world clearly and distinctly, but us? It’s already pretty great, we have a little portion of reading clearly and distinctly, the rest we blabber. We envelop the entire world, but confusedly, obscurely, illegibly. And we have our little portion, our little clear and distinct glimmer, our little glimmer on the world, our little world region: my very own room. That’s already not so bad, my own room! We shouldn’t ask for much more. I express the entire world, I envelop the entire world, but I only clearly envelop a small portion.
What distinguishes me from you, you from me? It’s that we don’t clearly express the same little portion. You’ll say: we have a common sphere, so that’s how we belong, for example, to a same time, that we are co-living. You understand, each of us has his/her common portion, but it can overlap the neighboring one; for example, when we meet in this location with security bars, [Laughter] we clearly express a little portion of space. But if we disperse, each of us again finds his/her own room. We can come together, we can separate, like an accordion. But in every case, our portion of clear envelopment, of legible envelopment, is extremely limited.
So there are necessarily several points of view, or if you prefer, there are necessarily several individual substances. Now I have my answer because, even if it’s true that each individual substance envelops the entire world, it can only read clearly a portion of the world, which is necessarily distinguished from the legible portion of the world, the other. And at the same time, that is not adequate because there we are going to find ourselves facing an impossible problem. We have to manage as best we can. That this is a great problem for Leibniz, that’s what always fascinated him: individuation. That’s his problem. Fortunately we still have a little dissertation he wrote, the exact title written in Latin, since they wrote in Latin at that period in the university; the title is Dissertation on the individual principle, he was 17 or 18 years old. So it’s the equivalent of a …  — They were more precocious back then. — It’s a little DEA [masters thesis], it’s a little essay, and it’s not by chance that from the start, this was his problem. So he grasps onto it, and it’s a very interesting discussion relating to certain philosophies of the Middle Ages, with Aristotle, but especially Saint Thomas [Aquinas] and Duns Scotus, and that indicates something that remains his focus in all his philosophy all the way to old age. Fine.
We are going to find ourselves in an impossible situation because, you see, what constitutes individuation for Leibniz? First answer which comes to mind: point of view. In fact, in the notion of point of view, he offered a sufficient consistency such that this might be a possible answer. It’s completely new, defining individuation by point of view. There had to be means for doing so; one had to pass through this entire theory of inflexion, of curves. Answer: that could be said, but it’s not the final word because, strictly speaking, point of view cannot define individuation; point of view cannot define the individual since point of view is only the modality of the individual. It’s only the mode of the individual. So, a second answer: let us assume that each individual envelops the entire world but understand that one only envelops clearly and distinctly a reduced portion of the world.  So it’s this reduced portion that would explain the individual, specifically two individuals do not have the same clear and distinct portion. But that doesn’t work either. You sense that it’s obviously because the individual is individual that it has a portion of the world. I cannot define the individual by the portion of world that it expresses. On the contrary, it’s because it is an individual that it only has a limited portion. That doesn’t work. So, what defines the individuality of the individual? How does one define individuation? We already have two possible answers, possible but not satisfying. Fine.
So, let’s continue: the entire world is enveloped in each subject, the subject is the individual, it is individual substance or the individual notion, it’s the concept proceeding all the way into the individual. It’s the individual notion, it’s what deserves a proper name; the subject is what deserves a proper name. Listen, it’s a strange tale, this logic of proper names, a strange tale because, imagine it: however little you might know, at what point does that [logic] breaks with all philosophy, at what does point it delivers something new? You imagine Plato having… No, that presumes that you know Plato, Plato is Ideas. It occurred to Plato to ask: are there ideas of individuals? Is there an idea of Socrates, an idea of Alcibiades? All that. But he encounters problems… Whereas Leibniz arrives and tells us that the notion is individual, that the concept goes all the way into the individual. Why can he say that? We have to put this aside because we have to answer, to answer urgently, to answer today. Perhaps. I hope we’ll have time, but we have to answer it today. Why?
It’s quite extraordinary. We were thinking about Descartes. All Cartesians never stop reflecting on the “I” in Descartes, “I think”. What is this “I”? There is a very interesting thesis written on the notion of the individual notion in Descartes, but it’s an extremely difficult subject because one has to research deeply into his texts. Is the “I” of “I think” an individual subject? No, it’s difficult, we cannot say that it might be indicated by a proper name. “I think” is not: me, Descartes, I am thinking! That’s what Leibniz tells us: “subject” can only have one meaning: what has a proper name. Caesar, Augustus, you, me. The subject is individual.
So I’ll start over. Each world is enveloped in each subject; we have seen how subjects were supposed to be distinguished, by this little portion. Notice that we already have two answers: by the variation of the series, or (which is the same thing) by the little portion. I am saying that it’s the same thing in the long run because, as the clear and distinct little portion enveloped in each subject varies according to the subject, it’s a variation of the infinite series. Hence, the two answers work well, but they work well by us understanding in them what seems to be their insufficiency. If I say that the world exists enveloped in each monad, … eh [Deleuze corrects himself], if I say that the world exists enveloped in each subject, well fine, it exists enveloped in each subject. But you sense, just as I was saying earlier, we are going to rediscover [that] it exists enveloped in each subject. It exists only as enveloped in each subject. The world does not exist outside the subject that envelops it, the world does not exist outside the subject that implicates it, that include it. [Pause] Might we say that this is idealism? Given we have to say something… the world does not exist outside the subjects that implicate it. It’s going to be very difficult to say even that it is idealism, one has to be wary. Why?
Fortunately there is an irreducible plurality of subjects. What do I mean? I mean, look at the transformation of problems that Leibniz imposes on us, I’d say, on two levels: for the relations that I might call relations of perception, visible-point of view relations, are substituted the relations of points of view among themselves or, what is really the same, for the world-subject relation is substituted the relation of subject between themselves. The world does not exist independently of subjects that envelop it; the world exists only as enveloped in subjects. Yes. But then the fundamental problem becomes: what is the relation of subjects between themselves since objectivity and reality of the world are strictly muddled in the relation of subjects between themselves? [Pause]
Is everything ok? I’d almost prefer that here we take a small break if… You see, what I have left is a ninth remark that I’d like you to reflect on during a short break. My ninth remark: finally the moment has arrived, we have to call it, like in English novels when there are chapter titles, “How it happened that Leibniz speaks to us about the notion of Monad”. How does the monad, the typically Leibnizian notion of Monad, develop from all this? This is why the term monad, up to now, is something I could not pronounce. Take a break, but please, come back. Let’s come back at … [Interruption of the recording] [1:32:09]
Let’s make clear this passage [Brief electronic buzz] from inflexion to inherence. [(1:32:19) 20 second interruption, electronic buzz, in the WebDeleuze recording; text from WebDeleuze] Is there a question? Any problems? [Return to the WebDeleuze recording] … He [Leibniz] says the world only exists insofar as it is enveloped in subject, not because of… [Pause, Deleuze does not complete the thought] eh?
A woman student: [On the subject of ignorance, Deleuze repeating the question]
Deleuze: Doesn’t being ignorant imply, if I understand correctly, something that is outside the subject, since the subject ignores it? Leibniz’s answer — that we cannot yet evaluate because we will spend several classes on this — is that there is no ignorance; there are only degrees of awareness (conscience), there are degrees of awareness scaled to infinity. And, in fact, your comment is very good: if for Leibniz there were ignorance, we would have to say that there is something in the world that escapes the subject, that is not enveloped in the subject. But for him, there is no ignorance; there are only degrees of awareness more or less clear, more or less obscure, more or less confused, etc., that is, either it is clear and one knows or it is something like – as it’s frequently said – rumbling (rumeur). When you say, I don’t know, it’s still a rumbling, it’s in the state of a wave breaking, a cosmic wave breaking in the depths of each of us. So perhaps all subjects communicate through this cosmic breaking wave, but it is not itself outside subjects. But your comment is quite right. Leibniz could not get by if he did not elaborate a theory that isn’t a theory of conscience/awareness, but a theory of an infinity of degrees of awareness.
A student: [On the points of view that go to infinity]
Deleuze: It’s indeed a matter of an infinite multiplicity. There is no opposition between multiplicity and infinity. For Leibniz, infinity is the necessary status of the multiple, the multiple goes to infinity. No problem there. All the more so since, for Leibniz, there is no finite multiplicity. There is only infinity in Leibniz. But here as well, that brings up things that we have not yet considered or discussed, that we will have to see later.
Another student: I don’t understand the difference between an individual notion and the concept that goes all the way to the individual.
Deleuze: No difference at all, these are two equivalent expressions. I’ve been saying that I accumulate, I sometimes multiply expressions because it seems to me that some among you can understand one but not the other, so best to add quite a few. I am trying to explain Leibniz to you. I am exactly in the situation of a blind person trying to tap into the clear area (portion claire) of each of you. But the clear area of everyone is very different according to what? This explains everything: according to your own background (votre culture). Those of you who have read some of Leibniz have a clear area – this isn’t meant to annoy the others – a greater clear area than those who have read nothing at all. And yet, to the extent that all subjects are in each subject, Leibniz really has to be part of you, even if you have read nothing, part of you in the state of rumbling (rumeur). You have heard that Leibniz said something about a monad. He employed the term “monad”. So you could be reduced to this miniscule part, and then there are some of you who have read Leibniz, and so they have a greater portion. But sometimes I cannot complete this if … What I’d like is not at all that… It’s just that each of you, your personal task is: to capture some Leibniz in your clear area, to the point that… Why would there be progress through Leibniz? Why is he one of the first philosophers who advance the notion of progress? It’s because each individual substance has a power, alas, rather restrained, of enlarging its clear area. That’s what it means to learn; it’s to increase step by step along the scale of degrees of consciousness. So fine, we have come to the ninth remark…
Georges Comtesse: [Question edited from the WebDeleuze recording, but included in the WebDeleuze transcript] How do you understand the following thing as regards Leibniz: he both affirms the subject as individual substance, the subsistence of individual receives nothing from the exterior, and yet he defines the individual subject by the proper name which, in fact, implies receiving something from the exterior? [Return to the recording]
Deleuze: Ha, let’s see. I say that one has to distinguish – here I am inventing nothing because I can recall the texts, it’s great (c’est une fête) – one has to distinguish the nominal proper name, which is the name of convention. Whereas Caesar is called Caesar, and Augustus is called Augustus, and each of you is called what you are called, that’s a conventional operation which, to some extent, can be said to come from the exterior, but without at all affecting the subject, according to Leibniz. Moreover, he has a text in New Essays on Human Understanding, a little chapter devoted to proper names where he says: proper names derive from common names, these are names of kind [espèce] and genre. For example, you are called “laborer,” it’s an example, someone with the name “laborer.” This means that he doesn’t believe in proper names in this sense. When I say: the proper name indicates the individual substance; it is something that the conventional proper name symbolizes, but only manages to symbolize. The proper name means: what is subject is an infinite aggregation of propositions. For example, I say: x has crossed the Rubicon, has been assassinated by his son or stepson, I don’t know. There the individual subject, I can say, is designated by a proper name that is his internal determination. So if you say to me: what is the proper name of Caesar, I answer: it’s the internal determination of Caesar. We will say that by convention the internal determination of Caesar, that aspect through which it is an enveloper (ce par quoi c’est une enveloppante), this internal determination is conventionally designated by the proper name “Caesar.” It’s a common name applied to an individual substance.
So, the ninth remark. We will have done a lot today. Where does the “monad” come from, a strange name? And in fact, the monad, you can’t do better since you open Monadology and the first word there, after the title, in paragraph one: “The monad, about which we will speak here is nothing other than a simple substance.” That sounds really bizarre, monad, to the point that, for us, each time we hear the word “monad”, we add, “as Leibniz said.” And where does that come from? Let’s note that he uses it rather late. Specialists locate the word’s first use in 1697, so there was an entire part of Leibniz’s work in place, in which he spoke about individual substance, soul, individual notion, and not a word about “monad”. That must have really pleased him, but he didn’t invent the word. The word “monad” was in consistent and systematic philosophical usage in the works of some very interesting authors that were neo-Platonists. The Greek word monas yields monad, because the declension is in “d” (monado), the Monas. If one looks hard – I am saying things that I am not entirely sure about because this is from research that I did not do and I don’t have the necessary dictionaries. The word is found in Plotinus.
But in what sense? In the sense of unity. Not just any sense of unity, but in a variable sense of unity. I can say, I think, that neither Plato nor even Plotinus, who is the founder of neo-Platonism, made systematic use of the word. On the other hand, systematic use occurs among the neo-Platonists, that is, the disciples of Plotinus, among whom the first great one is Proclus. Monos means “a single” (un seul), one all alone. One sees this in reading a very short book by Proclus, notably Elements of Theology, where one sees that monas designates something very particular because monas is unity, but there is another term. Monas is unity, but the One (capital O). The “en” (an, one) in Greek is not stated as monos, but as En, E and n, the En. And there is a Greek substantive derived from En which is Henas, that we translate as Hénade[5]. So it’s curious, you see: monad, hénade, monas, henas, what is that? Either that means nothing, and is useless, or monad indicates a very special type of unity, which is going to unfold, and that will receive status in neo-Platonism, an increasingly rigorous status starting with Proclus. So that’s what I think we need to know.
We need to know a little bit more about this: what is this particular sense of unity? Proclus tells us a lot about a certain stage of the One. You know that if we had to define it, neo-Platonism is a philosophy building as a fundamental category the One and the Multiple. That’s its business. Starting with Plato, there are two great directions: Aristotelianism that draws the couple form-matter from Plato, and neo-Platonism that draws forth the couple One-multiple starting with Plotinus. The Aristotelian tradition will consider components of form and matter which will yield solid figures. Plotinism, or neo-Platonism, will consider components of One and multiple that will yield figures of light. If there is a figure in Plotinus, it’s that of light. He is the great philosopher of light. Before things, there was light, and light emanates from the One, from the En. Parenthetically, but here I am getting too learned, in the Pythagorean tradition, Monas is fire.
You might wonder why I am saying that. Because in Proclus we indeed see that Monas does not designate just any kind of unity. Generally speaking, Monas is reserved for two special characteristics. It designates a stage of the One that is already massive in virtual multiplicity. And in fact, neo-Platonism will consist of a series of floors where, on the final floor, way on top, there is the One or Light, the One above all else, the One about which one can say nothing. The One more than Being. The One that is truly one, about which one cannot even say it Is, the One above Being, and above all else.
And starting from this One, in which form — there we have the philosophy of Plotinus, not our object of study this year — I won’t even say flows from it, but trickles from it like light, like light rays, streams from it light rays where we can locate degressive stages (stades dégressifs) of the One. And one of the stages of the One is when the One ceases being purely One in order to envelop, to implicate – involvere say the Latin translations – to envelop some multiple, and this enveloped multiple is of the virtual multiple, not yet passed into act, huge unities of a virtual multiplicity. And under the Monas, just like above the Monas there is the One, the One that is only One, the One without multiplicity, the purely One One; below the Monas, there is a one that is nothing other than an arithmetic element, a numerical element in a multiplicity that has passed into act, in an actual multiplicity. That’s the numerical unity.
So there we have the first characteristic, very approximately, because Proclus is rather awfully complicated. In brief summary, I say: monas designates first of all unity, when unity is full of a virtual multiplicity. In second place: monas designates unity when it is the principle of a degressive series (une série dégressive). For example, in the text Elements of Theology, I read: “The monad, serving the function of principle, engenders the multiplicity which is appropriated to it. This is why each series — neo-Platonists are the first to create a philosophy of series — is one, and each order is One.” In the Greek text, it’s En. You see: that monad, serving the function of principle, engenders the multiplicity which is appropriated to it; it’s why each series is one and each order is one. From one end to the other, it [the one] receives from its monad its descent toward the multiplicity, for it [the one] is neither of order nor of series if the monad remains in itself infertile. In other words, la monas is unity as principle of a degressive series.
Example: from the pure soul flows the souls of the Gods, and even the souls of the Gods themselves form an entire series. There the neo-Platonists surpassed themselves because there is the Jupiteic soul (l’âme Jupitéique), the dried-out soul (âme aréique), the titanic soul, the souls, the souls, the souls, the souls. The procession of souls is sublime, but this hardly matters. From the pure soul flow the souls of the Gods. From the souls of the Gods flow the souls of men, from the souls of men – which are reasonable souls – in certain cases (sous certains chefs) flow the souls of animals, etc. etc. … You have a degressive series. The principle of this series will be called Monas.
Similarly, if you make a series of the Enas, a series of the Ones, of unities, you place on top: the One more than Being, then the One which encompasses, which envelops a potential multiplicity, then the One that is nothing other than a unity in an actual multiplicity, you have a series. You will say that there is a Monas as principle of the series of Enades. You see that all this is really beautiful. So I say, to stay with Proclus and neo-Platonism, the Monas designates the unity, but under two conditions, that the unity be full, thick (grosse) with a virtual multiplicity that it envelops. Second condition: that it be the principle of a degressive series that flows from it. I don’t need to return to what we did in order to say that these two traits suit Leibniz marvelously.
A woman student: What is the reference in Proclus?
Deleuze: In Proclus? Ah, paragraph 21. But at the same time, there’s a constant. Monad is constantly present there. But on the other hand, Proclus is… Among the rare things that we still retain from Proclus, there is an admirable commentary on Parmenides where his thought is much more developed. That’s quite evidently a summary of lessons. But in the commentary on Plato’s Parmenides by Proclus, there is an entire theory of the monad, quite lovely.
You see what suited Leibniz. I would be astounded if he knew this word [monad] very late; he knew it the entire time, but it must have been in a kind of inspiration, he told himself suddenly: My God! Why haven’t I been using this word? It’s exactly what I need. And at the same time, he is going to transplant it entirely, for he will indeed retain its two traits: the monad is a unity as principle of series, and a unity as filled with a virtual multiplicity. As we say, filled with a virtual multiplicity since from his viewpoint, it is the opening onto an infinite series. So this suits us perfectly, but it still would be quite properly grotesque to say that Leibniz yielded to a neo-Platonic influence, since it is entirely true that Leibniz succumbed to neo-Platonic influence, but on entirely other points than this one, because by using the word “monad”, he gives to it a situation, another completely original function that neo-Platonists knew strictly nothing at all. And if you will, if I were to sum up, Leibniz tells us what would be monstrous and incomprehensible for a neo-Platonist: the monad [as] the individual notion, the individual itself, the individual taken in its notion; or, if you prefer, it’s subjective unity, it is subjectivity, it’s the subject. Which amounts to saying: unity as monad, is the individual.
And how did he get to the point of saying that? We have to see that there are two strictly linked points in Leibniz, which neo-Platonism does not grasp. These are the infinite and the individual. Why are these two points linked? Because Leibniz tells us, the individual envelops the infinite. You will find this text in New Essays on Human Understanding. I have to give you the paragraph reference so that you can read it yourself, but it’s very quick, he doesn’t analyze what he means, so it’s not terribly important, but the very text is therefore by Leibniz: “the individual envelops infinity.” What does that mean? It means something quite simple, but which, in my opinion, could only appear under a perspective in Christianity. What does it mean, the individual envelops infinity?
We can understand easily the individual-infinite relationship if we apply the notion of concept. How is a concept defined? Through this: there is an understanding and an extension. The understanding of the concept is the aggregate of predicates that are attributable to it – that’s what you call the understanding of a concept. The comprehension of a concept is what thing is designated by the concept, the aggregate of attributes that are predicable to it. For example, the lion is a courageous animal. I would say that “courageous animal” belongs to the comprehension of the concept “lion”. Let’s add other traits of the concept’s comprehension: “having a mane”, “roaring”, “sleeping a lot”, etc…. But you will object: you are forgetting the essential point. That’s on purpose: I am forgetting the traits by which we define the concept “lion”. Besides I don’t know them: mammal, I don’t know what, the essential characteristics, that’s all I know.
So comprehension is the aggregate of predicates that one can attribute to the object of the concept.[6] Ok? The extension of the concept is the number of copies (exemplaires), the number of objects subsumed under this concept, placed under this concept. How many lions are there? “How many lions are there?” responds to the extension of the concept. Fine.
The logic of the concept tells us what? It tells us that the more the extension diminishes, the more the comprehension increases, and vice versa. The more the extension diminishes, what does that mean? The more the extension diminishes, that is, tends toward one, the more the comprehension increases. Or the more the comprehension increases, that is, tends toward infinity, the more the extension diminishes, that is, tends toward one. These are things you have to know. An example, the concept “lion”. I suppose that currently there exist ten thousand lions. I give the extension as 10,000, the comprehension as this, that, such and such predicable attributes of “lion”. I make a step forward in a movement we can call the specification of the concept, another thing you have to know. I take the lions of the Sahara, belonging to the concept “lion”. The lions of the Sahara all have the traits attributable to “lion”. These are “lions”, but moreover they have more traits, specifically the particular traits of lions of the Sahara that other lions don’t have. That lions from… well, from elsewhere, don’t have: for example, having at the end of the tail a thicker clump of hair than for others. I would say, this is a trait of the comprehension of lions of the Sahara that other lions do not display, that I add on. I would say that lions of the Sahara have a greater comprehension than lions in general, but for that reason, they have a lesser extension. There are fewer lions from the Sahara than there are lions [in general]. Good. Let’s continue.
Biologists, or rather natural historians, naturalists can be led to say “Aaaah, but in such and such an oasis in the Sahara, there is a kind of lion that is not found in other regions of the Sahara.” That will make comprehension greater and extension lesser. Look at this quite simple great principle: given a concept, its extension and its comprehension are in inverse relation, that is: the greater the comprehension, the smaller the extension. You follow me because this is not going to be easy.
What happens? I hesitate, I am going to do what I never want to do, a kind of overview of philosophy, and here it’s absolutely necessary. What was happening regarding the concept, regarding this law, before Leibniz? I think that all philosophers – to my knowledge, without exception (although there were some very complicated texts) – in general, without exception, all philosophers told us: yes, but the concept ceases at a certain moment. There is a logical moment at which the concept ceases, that is, there is a logical moment at which the concept’s comprehension ceases. Below this, that’s no longer from the concept. You have to cease at some moment. Example, I come back to my lion: a lion from a particular oasis, African lion, Saharan lion, a lion from a particular oasis in the Sahara … [Interruption in the WebDeleuze transcript, with the notation “end of tape”]
… [Leibniz] says: in that, you won’t reconnect, you can go all the way to that indefinite – I am weighing my words – you can go to the indefinite, you will be able to prolong the concept’s comprehension indefinitely (à l’indéfini), you will never reach the individual. Why? Because the individual depends on accidents of matter and not on traits in the concept. There will always be several individuals under the concept. Were this only strictly speaking (en droit), there will always be several possible individuals. Even if I reached a state of the world in which only a single lion survived, the concept does not go all the way to its individuality. In fact, by virtue of the concept, there will always be an infinity of possible lions. The concept does not go to infinity. You can continue to the indefinite, you can continue indefinitely to push the concept’s comprehension, you will never reach the extension = 1. Any concept qua concept is liable to have (est justiciable de) an extension = x.
But then, what constitutes the individual since it isn’t the concept? In other words, the concept is always general. It always has an extension. The Saharan lion has a concept, the lion of a particular oasis has a concept, as far as you want, but individuation is not the same thing as specification. You can specify your concept as long as you want, but you will never reach the individual. What constitutes individuation? Certain Aristotelians answer: it is not form, which is form of concept; it’s matter, it is accident. In other words, they find themselves faced with the following problem: the individual is not an ultimate form that might be relatable (rapportable) to the concept. The individual is not an ultimate form, in other words, the concept ceases before the individual. You can pursue it indefinitely, but you will not reach the individual.
Hence this problem: what constitutes individuation since it is not a complicated specification? So I tell you: the first answer [is]: accidents, contingencies have to be made to intervene, that is, attributes that do not belong to the concept. Another answer, much more complex: individuation indeed depends on the form but is not itself a form. This is notably a very lovely theory of individuation from Duns Scotus, where individuation is defined. He tells us: this is not a form which is added to form as a kind (espèce) is added to genera (genre). In other words, there are no forms of the individual. However, individuation is not an accident of matter. He tells us, it’s the ultimate act of form. This isn’t simple: this isn’t a form that is added to form; it is the ultimate act of the final form. What does it mean, the ultimate act of the final form? Well, this isn’t the focus here, it would be another course. This is to tell you, simply, that everyone agrees about this: that in the long run, the form or the concept, in one way or another, stops before [reaching] the individual, does not link up with the individual, even if I can push indefinitely the concept’s comprehension. Fine.
Let’s have Leibniz speak. Never has anyone witnessed so much calm in the presence of so much daring. He will explain that there is no indefinite. There is only an actual infinite. He will immediately define the individual as the concept; the individual is the concept. The individual is the concept insofar as its comprehension is infinite and its extension unity. A concept whose comprehension is actually infinite, you see it’s the actual infinite that allows him to say that. If he said: the individual is the concept whose comprehension is indefinite, that would make no sense. It’s because there is actual infinite everywhere according to Leibniz that this definition is possible. It was therefore impossible for the neo-Platonists who had no idea of the actual infinite.
My difficulty (faute) is not to be able to tell you yet what the actual infinite is. But no matter, it suffices that you have a kind of little affective feeling. He tells us: the individual is the concept; not only do I reconcile them, but they are identical [Return to the WebDeleuze recording] because the individual is the concept in so far as it has an infinite actual comprehension, and therefore an extension equal to 1. You see, the individual envelops the infinite. What is it that lets him say that the individual envelops the infinite? Where does he get this idea? We saw this, there at least for once we have seen this. It’s the whole preceding theory, in which the monad, that is the individual substance, envelops the infinity of predicates that the states of the world constitute. So the concept goes all the way to the infinite, or the notion is individual, it’s the same thing. The monad is the huge individual unity of an infinite multiplicity.
In other words, if I had a mathematical symbol to propose for the individual, I would say – you are perhaps going to understand everything thanks to this – [Deleuze refers to a drawing on the board] 1 / infinite, one over the infinite. You may say, what interest is there in this? You are going to see why it’s of interest; it will be an amazing interest! And after we can’t go farther! Once you’ve understood the interest, we will go home to bed. [Laughter]
All this is curious, this individuality, this notion of individuation that invades philosophy. Why do I say [that] this presumes Christianity? Because Christianity, under its philosophical form, [Another interruption of the WebDeleuze recording, text furnished by the WebDeleuze transcript] is well known for confronting a very interesting problem that has not lost its pertinence today, specifically, the proofs of God’s existence. And the proofs of God’s existence, it is well known – it won’t be greatly discussed although it interested Leibniz greatly – the most noble is called the ontological proof. And the ontological proof, it is well known that it is stated as follows: I define God (without knowing if he exists, otherwise this would not work) as and by the infinitely perfect, the infinitely perfect. I conclude from this that God exists since if it didn’t exist, it would lack a perfection. You follow me. This is why we all think that God exists… Where we get into trouble is when someone like Leibniz, who nonetheless is quite in favor of the ontological proof, says: one mustn’t move so fast because what does “infinitely perfect” mean precisely? For the proof to be conclusive, says Leibniz, one must at least show that the infinitely perfect does not envelop contradiction.
Assume that the infinitely perfect might be a notion like a squared circle. In that case, I couldn’t conclude that the corresponding being exists. I could not; it would not be reasonable. The “greatest speed”, says Leibniz, is a contradictory notion; why? Because, by virtue of the definition of “speed,” with a given speed, [Return to the WebDeleuze recording] there is always a greater possible speed. So, the greatest speed is nonsensical (un non sens). What tells us that the infinitely perfect Being isn’t nonsensical? So he says: ontological proof can only conclude for the existence of God if it first shows that the absolutely perfect is a coherent notion, that implies no contradiction. Leibniz takes on the task of showing this. He is going to show it by showing that the infinitely perfect is l’omnitudo, the aggregate of all possibilities, and that the aggregate of all possibilities is possible. — I seem to be wandering off, but you will see that this will sneak back on us at the moment we least expect it. — The aggregate of all possibilities is possible, that’s what had to be shown for the ontological proof to be able to draw a conclusion out of the infinitely perfect to the existence of a corresponding God.
Great, and there we are! But if the aggregate of all possibilities is possible, in that case God necessarily exists, because the ontological argument works. Specifically: God is the infinitely perfect being, if it didn’t exist, it would be lacking a (form of) perfection; thus, I would contradict my definition in refusing him existence. So the ontological proof legitimately stands, according to Leibniz, on the condition of having shown that the aggregate of all possibilities was not nonsensical, provided that – parenthetically, he reproached Descartes for not having completed the necessary demonstration – he can draw a conclusion [about going] from the aggregate of all possibilities to the idea of a necessarily existing being, a singular Being, individual, singular, unique, called God. The ontological proof, according to Leibniz, thus goes from the infinite aggregate to the singular existence of a corresponding being, to the singular existence of a corresponding reality called God.
In other words, what is God’s expression (formule de Dieu)? I am going from the infinite aggregate of all possibilities to the singular existence of the corresponding being, which is endowed with all perfections and that I call God. Hence the proper name God. Everything occurs between proper names. What is the mathematical formula for the ontological proof? The mathematical proof for the ontological proof is infinity over 1, Infinity / 1. Why? Let’s return to his reasoning.
Infinity equals the aggregate of all possibilities. From this I conclude, if the aggregate of all possibilities is possible, that a corresponding individual being exists. I go from the infinite to the individual. In the case of God, I would say: the infinite envelops individuality. That’s the ontological proof. If we were to come up with a suitable corresponding formula, the ontological proof, the proof of God’s existence is: the infinite envelops individuality, understood as the individuality of God, the singularity of God, Infinity over 1. For other reasons, you have just seen why the monad had as mathematical symbol 1 over infinity (1/infinity). In fact, this time I start from individual unity, and this individual unity encloses the infinity of predicates one over infinity, I would say, from God (infinity/1) to the monad, to the individual subject (1/infinity).
What is that about, what is the relation? Here it is. That allows me to say that the monad is the inverse of God. Inverse? Inverse? What is that? Inverse means something very precise, that you have to know about. It’s in this sense that philosophy implicates a kind of knowledge (savoir). One has to know the sense of words. Why, for example, don’t I say “the opposite”? Why don’t I say that the monad is the opposite of God, or the contrary? This is not without a reason. Logic presents us with a very strict table of opposites, and we know that opposition by the contrary (contrariété) is not the same thing as opposition by contradiction. We know that there are all kinds of (forms of) opposition. Is inversion perhaps a type of opposition? But not just any old type. In this you simply cannot say… as much as you have the right to create concepts if you can, equally you have no right to omit the necessary science from philosophy, exactly as if you were doing mathematics, you would not have the right to ignore the science necessary for doing mathematics. So precisely here, since we are talking about mathematics, in math there is the notion of “inverse numbers”. Given a whole number, 2, what is its inverse? The inverse of 2? The contrary of 2 is -2. The inverse of 2 is a half. Why? [Deleuze goes to the board] Because there is no whole that you cannot write under the form numerator/denominator. So the number 2 is 2 over 1; the inverse of 2 over 1 is 1 over 2. The denominator becomes the numerator, and the numerator becomes the denominator. Thus 1 over 2 is the inverse of 2.
I am saying, strictly speaking: the monad 1/infinity is the inverse of God infinity / 1. This is literally true. So everything happens at this level, everything happens between individuals. Once we have said that there is the infinite everywhere, but simply this is not the same infinite. You understand that when Leibniz tells us: everything is infinite, and all is infinite in action (en acte), there is no indefinite, there is only the infinite. That does not prevent there being all kinds of infinites. The infinity of God is not the same as the infinity of the world enveloped by each individual, not at all. But I can say that the individual is exactly the inverse of God, each time you have the infinite and individuality. It’s through the couple infinity-individual that Leibniz is going to shake up all of philosophy. He causes the concept to go all the way to the individual. He is quite precisely the first to reconcile the concept and the individual since the comprehension of the concept not only can be extended indefinitely, but all the way to infinity.
All that seems quite arbitrary. That’s what he decided, but understand to what that commits him, and this is the point I wanted to reach because…  When others said, and didn’t see the means of extending the concept to the individual, when they thought that the concept had to stop before the individual, even if one could indefinitely extend its comprehension, it’s because they had a really odd way of developing the problem of individuation. And in this I allow myself to speak on my own behalf, but in the hope of having you understand something in Leibniz. It seems to me that all the theories of individuation before Leibniz had a catastrophic presupposition. Their catastrophic presupposition was that individuation comes afterwards, after the specification. Specification is the division of the concept in genres, kind (espèces), smaller and smaller kinds.
And it was quite simply assumed that it was entirely normal to begin by the most general, and that was Plato’s fault, the fault of others, but finally, nobody’s and everybody’s fault. They start off from the most universal, so necessarily, they don’t link back up with the individual. Since individuation is not a specification, it’s not by extending specification indefinitely that one will find the individual. So as they were telling themselves that the individual comes after the final kind (espèce), that the individual comes after the tiniest species, they are lost in advance, they will never be able to close the gap between the tiniest species and individuals. The contrary would have been required, only they didn’t have the means to do it. They had to become aware that all specification, that is, all assigning of kind or genre, I don’t say presupposed individual objects – that has already been done, it’s what is called the nominalism – no, it’s a matter of saying something else, but that all specification presupposes processes of individuation that, henceforth, cannot occur according to this type of specification. In other words, it’s individual that is first. [Pause]
If individuation is primary, in fact everything is comprehensible. The double individual-infinite relation, I say double relation: in the God’s case, infinity/unity, in the monad’s case, unity/infinity. In this sense, we take up this literally inverse relation of the monad and God. That allows us to pose all sorts of problems: if it is true that all individual substance is a point of view, is God a point of view? Can I talk of God as a simply infinite point of view? Is God something other than a point of view? Very strangely, the texts of Leibniz waver there. No doubt one could be both: God is indeed a point of view that passes through all the points of view, but at the same time, the Leibniz’s richest texts suggest that there are God views (des vues de Dieu) that engender points of view, but that there is no God point of view. Do you understand in which sense there is not God point of view? It’s that infinity / 1 is not a point of view formula. The point of view formula is 1 / infinity. That does not keep God from penetrating all points of view, precisely because the points of view are inverse from God’s position. The point of view position is inverse from God’s position.
That’s all we’ve got. (On n’en peut plus) It remains for us finally to say that we’ve completed our first part [of the course]. We have more or less shown how the upper floor developed. What we can simply conclude is that, in fact, it’s nonetheless an absolute reorganization of the tradition of two worlds. There are indeed two floors, but is this still two worlds? On the upper floor, there are individual substances that envelop the world. They envelop the world since they have for attributes all the states of the world. On the lower floor there is matter and its thousand pleats (replis). What is there between the two? I have shown how the two floors communicated (parenthetically, everything is fine). I showed this since I showed that inflexion participated both on the upper floor, since it’s the ideal genetic element, and that it’s starting from inflexion that we reached point of view and inherence, it belongs to the upper floor, but refers as well to the lower floor since it is the genetic element of pleats (replis) of matter. So the two floors communicate. This is completely new, which means that, on the upper floor, there are only subjects as individual notions. And God, it’s true. There is an infinity of 1 / infinity, and a sole all encompasser (seul-comprenant tout), a single infinity / 1.
So what is this Baroque world? I told you the last time [about] Tintoretto’s paintings.[7] You have to occupy two floors. There are no longer two worlds. We have to think about that; there are no longer two worlds, there are two floors: a floor in which bodies fall, and a floor in which soul fly forth (s’élancent). That’s what the Baroque world is: A floor of pleats of matter that never cease to overflow, in which bodies lose their equilibrium, are caught up in masses, all that. And then, on the upper floor, there is the dance of souls, a thousand modes of communications between them. Take a typically Baroque quite famous painting, El Greco’s The Burial of Count Orgaz, this famous painting by El Greco. Both floors are represented: below the burial and the participants at the burial, and above, on the upper part of the canvas, the extraordinary spontaneity of subjective forms, subjective forms called celestial, but are not so. Take Tintoretto, on one floor it falls, on another there’s a kind of incredible dance. It’s not even the movement, it’s the liveliest spontaneity, but are these really similar? Why are these two painters considered as two geniuses of the Baroque?[8]
So we are putting aside the session that we could have held on this because we have to make up time, but what we can gather is that the two floors are not a way of again baptizing the two worlds. It’s an extremely forceful way of placing in question the two worlds. On the upper floor, you will only find individual notions, individual subjects; on the lower floor you will only find matter in its pleats. These are not two worlds. What relations will there be between them? Beginning to emerge is Leibniz’s final very great concept: the relation will always be named harmony. Harmony. Why harmony? When we get there, to talk about harmony in Leibniz, because it’s one of his great concepts, we mustn’t forget what we discussed today.
My dream would be to find things as stupid (bête) as that; I realize with astonishment that, I think, they haven’t been completed, so [it’s] yet another reason for us to complete them, that no one has tried to create the list of senses of the word “harmony”, once we admit that, in Leibniz, they all intervene. Notably if you recall back to grade school (maybe beyond that), perhaps you recall that there is a harmonic mean (moyenne) of numbers that is not the same thing as the arithmetic mean. The arithmetic mean isn’t difficult, but the harmonic mean? We have to relocate our childhood suffering, because this isn’t just nothing. We have to re-understand what a harmonic mean is. And I close on this today, and why? Because a harmonic mean deals with numbers and their inverses, and because the harmonic mean passes through the relation of the number and its inverse, like 2 and 1/2 . It’s the consideration of inverses that defines the harmonic mean in contrast to the arithmetic mean. We have to reflect on this.
So, in the second trimester, when we get back in the new year, I hope nonetheless that we will begin to consider the relationship between Whitehead and Leibniz [BNF recording interruption, high-pitched sound, then return to the recording] … in its musical, arithmetic aspects, all of that. … Isabelle, Isabelle, please wait for me, wait for me so that we can talk, if you have a moment. [End of the session] [2:27:12]

Lecture 05, 6 January 1987: Fragment — Preformation and Epigenesis, and the Monad, the Souls, and God
Part 1
… The two words will take on an entirely unexpected meaning… [Inaudible words] They will undergo development in such conditions that another word would be required, and one was located. [Pause] The other word is epigenesis since epigenesis is at least opposed to preformation. Epigenesis is the development of an organism through the appearance of new characteristics, that is, characteristics that were not contained previously in any form whatsoever. [Pause] In the development of an organism, the principle of epigenesis is this: the development of an organism does not consist in developing previously extant parts, however small these might be, but in causing entirely new characteristics to emerge. This idea, in fact, does not come from Darwin; it’s the achievement of a biologist named [Kaspar Friedrich] Wolff who is the creator of this notion of an epigenesis.[2] Going forward, evolution is the creation of these new forms; we are developed through the creation of new forms not previously existing, so that everything that I would like to show in this parenthesis is that development and evolution in the seventeenth century have a meaning strictly opposed to the meaning they will take on after Wolff and Darwin, that is, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the end of the eighteenth and into the nineteenth century. That’s how things often occurs for scientific notions, a complete reversal of the notion, so much so that you can constantly find the term “evolution” in the seventeenth century regarding the organism [coughing, words barely audible] without it taking on an evolutionist sense because evolution always consists in the development of pre-formed parts, of infinitely small parts [coughing, words inaudible] [Pause]
So I come back to Leibniz. You see, the organism contains an infinity of infinitely small organisms, that is, folded onto themselves in a thousand ways, all of this to infinity, such that Leibniz can say, but an organism never dies. It pleats its own parts to infinity; but an organism, necessarily, survives in its ashes. Why did he get mixed up in all that? You will say that it’s not scientific at all. You see immediately his interest in preformation. It’s because he judged that natural history could only become a science if it broke with the idea of spontaneous generation. So this is the idea that an organism can only be born from an organism. And in fact, it’s the great argument of the Preformists: if there were no preformation of seeds at that point, nothing would prevent spontaneous generation. Good.
And so, here we have matter constituted through this infinity. Organic matter is constituted by this infinity of infinitely small organisms folded into themselves in every manner possible. And development comes when — and there is no doubt a word to evoke it — God’s decrees in the world’s creation… God set a moment in which each seed will be called to unfold its own parts and a moment in which it will return to the folded and enveloped state. [Pause] Yes? It’s a vision. [Pause] And so, we see well that, for Leibniz, a soul is always connected to an organism. Moreover, a soul never loses its body. A soul is always connected to a body. What does death mean? … We’ve see this before,[3] but clearly, we need to repeat this. At death, [Leibniz] says, it’s not at all the soul is separated from the body; in the end, the soul is inseparable from the body. [Pause] So what happens at death? When I die, that means my organism has finished its time, that is, its time of development. All that is organic folds back to infinity, folds back to infinity. Although I might have myself cremated, the soul subsists in the ashes. So my soul hasn’t left its body. It’s simply that instead of being in a rapport with a developed body, it’s in relation with a body infinitely pleated and enveloped onto itself. See what Leibniz had in mind that we hardly ever have in mind: it’s about justifying resurrection, the resurrection of bodies. For the hour will come in which, for the second time, God will call us toward the development of our organic parts, and that will be the resurrection of bodies. Leibniz tells us that this is very poorly expressed, the resurrection of bodies, since it’s nothing other than the way in which God calls back our implicated organism, our enveloped organism, to a second term of development. This is a beautiful idea, but the Catholics didn’t like this, [Laughter] they greatly criticized Leibniz, [saying] you’re rather materialist since you thought up this tale.
But that’s not all. So I would say [that] there are souls enveloped and developed, organic souls. There are souls that have been developed everywhere in this state downstairs. They are infinitely disseminated in the folds of matter. See, when I die, that means that my organic soul folds itself infinitely into the pleats of matter. I fold myself infinitely into the pleats of the ashes, and there I wait, I wait calmly for God, as Leibniz says, to recall me into the great theatre. The great theatre of what? [It’s] the [upper] floor above, not that all souls are called to the upper floor. All the souls, simply animal and sensitive, stay on the lower floor, either infinitely folded into the pleats of matter, or unfolded according to their infinite dream of development. Good. This is the lower floor. These are the souls that Leibniz calls sensitive souls.
And certain souls have been predestined as reasonable by God from the start of creation, endowed with reason. An infinity of souls have been created by God as reasonable souls. What does that mean? Reasonable souls are special souls. They are inseparable from an organism, and one that is folded. They too haunt the lower floor; they too haunt the lower floor. You see, there are no other words than “haunting the lower floor”. But when the moment arrives, foreseen by God’s decrees, when that moment comes, then their parts are not satisfied with developing themselves into a unified [inaudible word; ? becoming] that corresponds to the perpetuation of the species, so they climb to the upper floor. The word that Leibniz uses having a sense then that has to be taken literally, the souls predestined to be reasonable experience an elevation. We have to take this literally in our schema. They go from the lower floor where they existed insofar as they are folded on themselves, and they reach the upper floor toward the region of their destination. These are veritable souls that fully deserve the word monad, and only they deserve the word monad. The others are only designated as sub-monads, or inferior monads. And then, in the developed reasonable soul, for the reasonable soul and only it, to develop is to rise above, climb, to pass from one floor to the other. And so, for that reason, when you encounter the word “elevation”, we almost have to take it in a kind of unique sense, and at that moment, it’s those monads, reasonable souls that, as such, include the folds that link to innate notions, to innate ideas, of pre-correspondence to the upper floor. They have climbed from the lower floor to the upper floor, and to the farthest limit, it is they that constitute the upper floor. In fact, the upper floor is [inaudible word] since the upper floor is uniquely of monads without doors or windows, that is, of reasonable monads. [Pause]
And I’d like for you to sense how through this kind of natural slippage, there are also perpetually references of what we’ve seen concerning the mathematical side and all that. Since I am reviewing, what has my subject been? In the end, it has been to emphasize the inflection-inclusion relation, how to go… I believe that we aren’t speaking about Leibniz if we don’t talk about inflection. That’s all I wanted to say, and it’s where we will pick up the next time. We have to start off from inflection and from the basic mathematical givens, from there, downstairs, to inclusion, that is, to the discovery of the monad. That was the first important point, and it presupposes and refers to a conception, I don’t know how to say it, a mathematico-logical conception of infinity. If you haven’t understood the necessity of the passage from inflection to inclusion, I believe that this cannot become clearer for what Leibniz says. And the second point, this time, if we don’t directly take account of the infinite, this kind of face-off or expression of reversed figures of God and the monad, that is, of God and the individual notion, of God and the individual. I was telling you [that] the expression…
A student: [Inaudible question; Deleuze’s response concerns the drawing on the board which he continues to develop while answering. Thus, what he says is both lost in terms of sound quality and rather vague as regards the precise reference.]
Deleuze: I cannot reference that here. It’s outside this drawing. There is much more in the inflection-inclusion relationship than this drawing allows to be expressed. There is no reason for having a drawing that would include totally everything… For me, some drawings are ok; the other kind, well, in one sense it’s not what’s obvious because it’s a matter of having a little intuition, you know…
If I say, what is this? Because the question is … Henceforth if add, here I have the monad, I have the monad in referring to it in bulk, but in all that, I haven’t yet seen God, and yet it is everywhere because we talk about it all the time; we constantly have to refer to God. Where will we situate it? So I’m not saying it’s encompassed in the drawing provided that this would be for other constructions. We can immediately sense, for example, that this, on the upper floor, one finds a single monad, with neither doors nor windows, with its internal tapestry, and containing and including the world; it sustains an infinity of monads. You recall what includes the world, each with its own point of view. So, I believe that from one monad to the next, the folds are not the same, they are not in the same order. So in fact, the little construction upstairs is doubled infinitely.
Good, I am saying [that] the lower floor and the upper floor communicate, but all the upper floors, that is, all the monads, how would they communicate? They have neither doors, nor windows, and in their level, it remains absolutely true that there are neither doors, nor windows. But then the whole problem arises in Leibniz; problems don’t stop arising. If they don’t communicate, what is going to cause them to communicate? You sense this immediately: communication is going to be musical; it can only be musical. Each one sings a tune that is in harmony with the other’s tune, but without knowing the other’s tune. There’s a splendid metaphor; he really loves to situate [things]. What he adores is a grand orchestra in which the parts would be dreamlike, each one finding its tune, Leibniz says. And in what conditions would there be a harmony between the tunes? Each monad brings forth its song. Or if you prefer, technically we could say, each monad is a melodic line. So there is a polyphony of monads, but that would not be enough because each monad already has an infinity of melodic lines. A fold, a sound inflection are melodic lines, and this not a metaphor. A melodic line is a sound inflection that we would define, you’ll see, when we are on the topic of harmony in Leibniz. Perhaps we will understand that as a definition of a melodic line, a sound inflection. Fine. So I can already say that there is an infinity of melodies in each monad. It remains for me to say that a monad has a melodic characteristic, or rather, each one has some.
So you see quite well, one has its little tune. What guarantees the accord of melodic lines is called harmony. If we define the melodic line as sound inflection, I define harmony as the accord between melodic lines. What can guarantee the accord of melodic lines since they are unaware of each other? Each monad is without doors or windows. This is the problem of harmony. Where does harmony between monads come from, that is, how is it that each one referring to, including the world, they all nonetheless refer to a single and same monad and compose a single and same monad? It’s obvious that the answer is to be sought on God’s side, but I immediately remind you that Leibniz doesn’t say that it’s thanks to God that [inaudible]. He explains how God acts; God’s operations in Leibniz are solely complicated. It’s certain that God is a prodigious mathematician in Leibniz, fully aware of the most modern discoveries, and Leibniz’s own as well. So clearly God is a person like Leibniz.
But where does this come from? Yet again, and this is one more thing acquired for you to hold on to for next time, so what is the expression? Inclusion-inflection, the rapport between each other, you can understand already that in causing a theory of infinity to intervene, if you place yourself inside this theory of infinity, you have two situations: so a first infinity is God, but what does that mean, God? Is this infinity simply? No. It’s infinity, insofar as it’s supposed to constitute a unitary Being (être Un); if I say I believe in infinity, that doesn’t mean I am saying that I believe in God. When do you believe in God? You must know when you believe in God. You have to know what you believe in. You don’t at all believe in God when you believe in infinity. You believe in God when you believe that infinity creates One, that is, that infinity creates a being, [Pause] such that this is what Leibniz says quite well: the ontological proof, the proof of God’s existence doesn’t work if we haven’t shown the condition in which infinity is likely to form a being. For if infinity doesn’t form a being, infinity doesn’t work in any manner. You see, there are two levels, even of discussion: is there an infinity — perhaps there isn’t one — and then, a second question, even assuming that there’s an infinity, in order to speak of God, this infinity has to constitute a being. Under what condition? This is what Leibniz holds against Descartes, that Descartes moves much too quickly. He concludes for God’s infinity, but he didn’t show the condition under which infinity was able to create a being. Thus, infinity constitutes a being, a single unitary Being. In fact, I am saying that there cannot be two of them. This is the magic expression of God: infinity over 1. Therefore, I cannot say that infinity equals God, but I can say infinity over 1 equals God, if the expression has any sense.
Now, let’s come to the monad, thus moving upward. It is unity. We saw its point of view, its individuality. It is the individual itself. It is the individual notion, and it envelops infinity. It’s a story of inflections. It includes all the folds to infinity. Thus its expression [is] one over infinity equals the individual notion, the monad. Between the two, you recall, there is the exact rapport that in arithmetic we call the relation of a number and its inverse, a number always able to be written in the fractional form or denominator, being equal to a multiple, 2 equals 2 over 1, 3 equals 3 over 1, etc. The resulting number is what you obtain by exchanging the numerator and denominator, that is, the inverse number of 3, that is, 1 over 3. The inverse number of God is one over infinity, meaning I can say that the monad is the inverse of God. That sometimes doesn’t prevent Leibniz, in other texts, from telling us, God is “monas monadum”, that is, the monad of monads, the superior monad of all. In other texts, he’ll suggest that God is not a point of view although it passes through all points of view. You see, there’s a variance, it’s not the same thing. We must always choose an aggregate of texts as a scale of rigor, and I think that the most rigorous texts would be the ones in which Leibniz tries to tell us that God and the monad are in harmony, in an inverse relation, properly speaking, that is, the monad is the inverse of God. [Pause]
So this is some of what I wanted to tell you, [Deleuze sits back down] and on the importance… although this text…. But it’s nearly my turn to ask you certain things.[4] First, if I may dare, but you tell me sincerely if this bothers you or not, if you return another time, then I would obviously desire an intervention by you, but to come at a time we agree upon.[5] I will be fully engaged in considering the conception of singularities in Leibniz, and you sense why I am saying this, singularities, because inflection, an inflection can only be defined through a singularity that mathematicians precisely call an intrinsic singularity. I mean, if you take, let’s say, a singularity, what is it? This is very important because here I am dealing with things not so good from a mathematical point of view, but he’s [Marek] there to correct me. It’s not difficult; a singularity: it’s when, in mathematics, something happens, whatever it might be, happening to something, when an event occurs. As soon as there is an event, there’s a singularity. So a singularity is the imprint of an event on a mathematical being, let’s assume. And the richness of this notion of singularity, [it’s] that if philosophy doesn’t reach a healthy conception of singularities, healthy and rigorous, then it will increasingly lose all possible contact with mathematical work, and for this, there is a kind of common task. And fortunately, the department of mathematics at Vincennes, perhaps due to the privileged relations existing between philosophy and mathematics, at Saint Denis, I believe that you are greatly involved with singularities.
And what I mean is, you see, inflection, [Deleuze again gets up and speaks at the board] singularity, it’s the point of inflection, there where the tangent crosses the curve. It’s an intrinsic singularity. Why? Because, it is called intrinsic because it’s independent from any axis of coordinates. It refers to no axis of coordinates. There is no beginning, and no extrema; there are no highs or lows, etc. There is no weight. There is no extrinsic determination. Where the point of inflection is located also is where, par excellence, the point of singularity is found. Good. Then, you can have some renowned singularities that, as we’ve said, are extrema. For example, a square has four singularities, [inaudible] the other points; any point whatever there creates an ordinary [point], and not a singularity, and at its four singularities there corresponds something occurring, an event. Singularity is the name of the mathematical event. And the event is inflection; the event passes through the inflection. But there, finally, you have some singularities, but no doubt secondary singularities that imply axes of coordinates, that imply extrema, the determination of extrema, the extremities of as segment, etc.[6]
So you have all sorts of singularities. [Deleuze retakes his seat] The idea as departure point that I would like to adopt is that inflection presents the basic intrinsic singularity, but as we move forward, we will realize that Leibniz accedes to a theory of singularities, and especially you are already prepared to avoid confusing “singular” and “individual”. The notion of “individual” is the monad; it excludes the world, so at the outside, the entire series of possible inflections. Thus we must say singularity is pre-individual. We must not confuse “singular” and “individual”. “Singular” designates the adventure and the event. The notion “individual” refers, designates the subject that provokes and undergoes the event. What will the rapport between singularity and individual be? What is the singularity-individual rapport? This will be an essential problem for us. Nothing can be achieved other than through development of the mathematical theory of singularities. Will this have been required of Leibniz? Yes and no. Why? Because Leibniz, I believe, is the first mathematical theoretician of singularities. And on this, [Deleuze addresses Marek directly] you can speak infinitely better than I. You all know that, in mathematics, there is no theory of functions without being at the same time a theory of singularities. So the theory of functions is the basis for modern mathematics. Understand that what we call a function in mathematics cannot be defined independent from singularities. So here we come to the heart of mathematics.
So almost unless… What I am asking, [Deleuze again talks directly to Marek] would it be a bother for you when I reach that point… I will alert you the week before, and you can let me know… And are you familiar with Leibniz’s texts? Have you seen them?
Marek: [He responds briefly, inaudibly]
Deleuze: You’ve seen some of them? Well, then, this will be extremely valuable. So this won’t bother you? In principle, I will call you the week before. Fine, there won’t be any problem. Because speaking about the future course organization, I’ve asked [this] of someone else, someone I admire greatly as well, someone extremely competent, Isabelle Stengers — I’m talking about her because she isn’t here. I am struck by the enormous importance of a philosopher, I am not sure, perhaps American, [NB: in fact, British] who is no longer known today because he was eliminated by the Wittgenstein gang, someone who is one of the greatest geniuses of the twentieth century, named [Alfred North] Whitehead, who is at once a great logician, a great mathematician, a great physicist, and moreover a great philosopher. In my view, he’s the last one who brings together this encyclopedic stature that comes down from Leibniz. And I’m struck both by Whitehead’s absolute originality, and — without suggesting he’s a disciple — by his constant interaction with Leibniz. And I even think that it’s thanks to Whitehead that perhaps we can understand some things in Leibniz that, without Whitehead, might remain much more obscure, and that Whitehead allows us a reading of Leibniz not particularly modern — that wouldn’t be good — but that the developments mattering to him will illuminate. So I’ve asked her to come to help me on this point since she knows Whitehead quite well.
Third point: I’ve asked two of you, without excluding anyone else, to study the theme of harmony for the following reason that I am summing up so that everyone will understand the scope of the problem.[7] In Leibniz, harmony is a word that appears all the time; all of Leibniz’s commentators take note and comment on harmony. But to my knowledge — and I insist, only to my knowledge — no one has undertaken the task, and this would be both an easy and difficult task, and that nonetheless seems infinitely necessary. It’s that harmony has extremely different senses. For example, in mathematics, in arithmetic, there’s a history of means (moyennes) called harmonic that are distinguished from means called arithmetic. And I just note that the means called “harmonic” are distinguished from the means called “arithmetic” because they [arithmetic means] essentially take into account not only numbers but also the inverse of these numbers. You see? The inverse is in the rigorous arithmetic sense, that is, transformation of numerator and denominator. So here you have the arithmetic domain.
A second domain is acoustics, when we speak of the harmonics of a sound. In this case, the harmonics of a sound refers to an arithmetic notion itself, that of primary numbers. Leibniz was obsessed with reflection on primary numbers. Why? Because he thinks it’s the only way to define numbers. His idea, one we’ll return to at the next meeting, is unique and fundamental for him, that a number could only be defined by the primary numbers that include it. In other words, it’s decomposing, it’s decomposing — and he even gets a logical theorem out of this — if you will, in decomposing something, analyzing something, one must find, in this something’s domain, something that is the equivalent of primary numbers. This is the characteristic’s purpose.
For example, if you have 6, not a primary number, if you want the definition of 6, you decompose its into primary numbers. So that would give you what? A definition of 6 – you know what a primary number is? I refer you to you know who [clearly he refers to his mathematician colleague, Marek]. I mean, it’s on purpose; you have do a bit of work sometimes, you know? I will tell you, the only definition… This is somewhat a response to Plato; if you will, Plato told us, what is 6? 6 is very odd. It’s 3 + 3, but it’s also 2 + 5, but it’s also 5 + 1. So what is 6 ? From this the idea of 6 comes, [that] you can decompose in multiple ways. Leibniz say, maybe; we can always decompose things in all sorts of ways, but there is only one good [way], and this is also opposed to Descartes. He’s [Leibniz] very, very clever, and above all, he says, what do you want? It’s always about what you want, but there is only one good way. There aren’t several of them, and the only good [way] is decomposition into primary numbers, such that for all things, you have to find the equivalents in primary factors. So it’s when you’ve decomposed something into primary factors that you are at least sure that the primary numbers can no longer be decomposed since they are, by definition, primary numbers, that is, only divisible by itself, not divisible by another number. Thus, whatever the number might be, you see how you are going to define it. If you can define it, well then, the primary numbers themselves cannot be defined [since] there is no point in defining primary numbers. In their domain, the domain of numbers, these are primitive elements.
So that creates for us a new definition of the domain of harmony, harmonics and primary numbers. I was talking earlier of means and inverted numbers, the primary domain of harmony. The second domain of harmony [is] sounds and primary numbers. The third domain, a musical [domain], [there are] melodic lines and harmony. What is harmony’s situation in relation to melodic lines? I believe that there’s no point, it’s too easy to comment on harmony in Leibniz if, after saying that he uses the word in all sorts of way, to the point that in one text, in a note on a few pages, there is a splendid expression. He says, to exist is to harmonize. [Interruption of the recording] [46:27]
 
Part 2
… being under any harmony, being the prey of a harmony. And well, these are the three points, and in fact, in our research on Leibniz and the Baroque, these will suddenly be linked to what is a Baroque music, and especially to what is the relation of Baroque music and harmony. The emergence of harmony in the fate of music, are there correspondences with the emergence of Leibniz’s philosophy, in philosophy generally?
Richard Pinhas:[8] [Intervention about recent developments of harmony in music and in electronic technology, notably, the harmonizer]
Deleuze: You spoke to us about this; you even explained this to me two years ago, or I don’t know when; you’ll take a look at this? … Moreover, this will be a Combinatory (une combinatoire).
Pinhas: Entirely, because even theoretically, there is…
Deleuze: It’s a device…
Pinhas: [Pierre] Boulez uses that in “Répons”.
Deleuze: Ah, the famous device, it’s a harmonizer.
Pinhas: [Discussion on the harmonizer’s functioning, especially delays and pre-established accords]
Deleuze: Ah, pre-established?
Pinhas: No, the accords are pre-selected.
Deleuze: I understand that, but pre-established! That Boulez, he always thought that he was God. [Laughter] I need a diagram; you have to find a diagram for that. You will show me the diagrams. Do you have them? You haven’t lost them?
Pinhas: Yes, indeed, no problem there.
Deleuze: Here’s our task: the first person up [Marek] will be discussing singularities, and I will give you a call. Next week I will know a bit more in what… So, we will see. I mean, if we have time, if there aren’t too many “events” … Yes?
A student: [Inaudible question about reincarnation in Leibniz]
Deleuze: No, so you have not understood me because… What emerged from what I said was that there couldn’t be any reincarnation since we never lose our organism. [Leibniz] has an admirable, adorable text where he says: the whole Orient was wrong because there is no metempsychosis; there is a meta-schematics. And meta-schematics means the stages of envelopment and development. There cannot be any metempsychosis because there cannot be a soul without a body, and there cannot be a soul passing from one body to another. You are condemned to your body; simply your body might be big and voluminous and give you all kinds of satisfactions, or your body might be so folded into itself that it lies in ashes, in the folds of matter. So then, you are completely deadened since you yourself are without any reason. Following this splendid idea, in this state of the organism completely folded in on itself, the organism grasps things, continues to perceive, but everything is a rumbling (rumeur); it’s the state of rumbling. When your organic parts are completely folded, you are exactly in the same state as the single thing that could give you a vague idea of your developed state; it’s when you received a whack on the head, and you fall unconscious. There is no death; there are unconscious states in this person, which is marvelous. I faint, you see, I am going to faint, and this is how I am, as if I had been whacked on the head. Since, if you wait a while, it’s the vampire’s death. I get smaller, I get smaller, and then you no longer can see me, but I am still attached to my body that is folded into itself. So there are never any reincarnations because there is no basis for reincarnations. There is no metempsychosis. I cannot move myself from one body to another, not at all. You will never be haunted by someone else’s soul. Each one of us keeps his or her body, simply such a state in which it will be rediscovered for a glorious moment of the bodies’ return.
But you see, the bodies’ return is not the same thing as the elevation. Elevation is a lay concept. It’s when the souls called upon to be reasonable unfold their own parts and are henceforth called to the upper floor, on condition that they come back down when they refold their parts after having completed their lives. It’s beautiful. [A question from the same student about a text, the reference to which is inaudible] Between the two currents? Metempsychosis and this kind of doctrine? Listen, it’s not that… Listen, I would say that it’s not a question for the history of philosophy because if you desire this kind of debate, it’s one that, I believe, the Christians led in their opposition to transmigration, to metempsychosis. And on the other hand, it was already fashionable in the seventeenth century, greatly so, the discussion between a Christian philosopher and a Chinese philosopher. There’s a treatise by Malebranche that isn’t bad, precisely called Dialogue between a Christian Philosopher and a Chinese Philosopher. If he had an idea: that the Chinese were stronger than the Europeans, but that the Europeans were nonetheless weaker than Leibniz. So, [Laughter] the idea is that… I was telling you earlier that to undertake decompositions – but do I have time to discuss all this? I was thinking that I’d let you speak, and then… But here we are, these are good things since this will make Leibniz more familiar to you.
He said, in order to undertake decomposition, one must not think that everything is possible; moreover, one must find a good symbolic system. Very often, you cannot decompose something because you do not find the symbolic system. And taking… Let’s come back to the problem of numbers. Leibniz tells us something very, very unusual for the seventeenth century and that only the mathematicians of his era understood completely. But he so fears exchanges of ideas of mathematical philosophy in the seventeenth century, it’s quite funny what he says. He says, you understand, if you remain in the decimal system, the current system, there will be some very difficult things to demonstrate about numbers. For example, to demonstrate that 3 times 3 equal 9 is not easy. He adored this kind of demonstration; in the next class, we will see how he shows that 2 times 2 equals 4, some thoughts in his attempt at logics and Combinatories (combinatoires) and characteristics. And [Michel] Serres was right, that this is the way in which he was so modern. But if you take the decimal system, it’s not easy. On the other hand, in some ways, he says, the binary system, which recognizes only two terms, only two digits, 0 and 1 – it’s the binary system in which you write all numbers with 0 and 1, you see? I am reminding you for those who don’t recall it… You learned [this] in school, I hope. [Deleuze returns to the board] 0 is 0; 1, you write 01, that is, you write 1, that still works. 2 in the binary system is 10. [Deleuze writes while speaking] There, you remember everything. 4 [Students complete his answers] 100; 5, you write… There you are, etc. etc. You have the binary system. If you multiply 3 times 3, you have 11 by 11. [Pause; Deleuze continues writing on the board while showing multiplications in the binary system] There, you remember everything. These are things that we studied in junior high school, it seems to me. [He continues; students help him with the multiplications; then Deleuze sits back down]
Leibniz says, to complete the demonstration that 3 times 3 equals 9, it’s much easier, and the operations are much shorter, if we do it through the binary system than using the decimal system. Fine, he showed this. It interested him greatly because he says, in the end, what’s brilliant in the binary system is that the two signs are the signs of being and nothingness. He has a very beautiful text, [saying] this is how God calculated. God obviously calculated in the binary system since there are only two things, being and nothingness. It cannot calculate by 10, God. [Laughter] That would be absurd. And, he says, the Chinese – in this, it’s a philological text. Leibniz’s texts are essentially divided between philosophy, mathematics, and then a whole group of texts: there are philological texts, some texts on mines. He was interested in everything – mines! Do you know why he was interested in mines? Well, I understand him. At least, I can explain it, that’s an advantage. It’s because of veins and lodes; mines are inflections. That was his passion, the story of lodes. That proved he was right about all his tales of pleats of matter. Mines are the very case of the state of matter in pleats, such that in all kinds of letters, Leibniz asks specialists all manner of details on mines, how to create a silver lode, all that. Mines are [inaudible; a place name], he is going to do research down there, and what interested him is how matter pleats itself. If you are a bit familiar with Descartes, you have to feel to what extent a philosophy is a very foreign [inaudible word], even if it deals with apparently similar problems. Leibniz’s curiosity is always evident, but it twists things; there’s never anything straight. Things never cease being twisted. How does one recognize a world in which everything is twisted? Must we untwist it? Descartes untwists everything. Descartes could care less about coordinates such that… Ok… Descartes thinks of only one thing : straightening. Not Leibniz; one must follow inflections; one must see where they lead me. One must… So, mines are admirable, with inflection and inclusion. You think of all that this contains to please him: inflections and the monad. He’s happy; he’s more than happy, he is delighted. It’s the very world for Leibniz that he finds in mines.
But then, the Chinese! The Chinese, he says, possess a form of calculus that no one understood given its deep mystery. I don’t recall the name of this calculus anyway. [Leibniz] provided it. I don’t know; perhaps we need to ask a specialist in Chinese. Oh! We have one here! [Deleuze laughs] Ah, but of course!
A student: [He reminds Deleuze of a Leibniz text on Chinese]
Deleuze: Ah, I no longer recalled that, but, yes, yes, yes! What little I recall of Leibniz’s text, we will need to ask [inaudible] for an explanation… it’s… He operates through two sorts of signs, those that are very full and those that are pointed. It’s a calculus… and we are told that missionaries have still not been able to penetrate the secret of this calculus. Fine, there is still a hope…
A student: [Inaudible intervention]
Deleuze: Ah, really?
Another student: [Inaudible comment]
Deleuze: So, it’s binary… It’s Leibniz… Perhaps with the help of the missionaries, he says, but it’s a binary calculus. And then he says, mine, ours, the binary calculus in Leibniz’s life is better because the symbols of the numbers 0 and 1, for Leibniz, are infinitely more manageable than the full and disconnected lines. Ah, I am not getting into the question of who is right or wrong, but nonetheless Leibniz doesn’t forget the problems of the Christians, although he isn’t Catholic, but reformed. He says that we have to let our missionaries know urgently, he writes, because this could perhaps be useful for their converting the Chinese. [Laughter] So, they would travel there and tell the Chinese: you understand, you’re right. You have found the Christic truth. Only you don’t know that it’s Christic; you don’t know that it’s Christic because you are working with your two lines. You have in some ways remained Cartesians. The Chinese are too Cartesian. You kept using your lines, full lines and disconnected lines. But it’s not useful; if you manage to use arithmetic symbols that are truly symbols of God, 0 and 1, being and nothingness, at once you would recognize Christ’s superiority over your gods. You would convert, and we would go toward the world unity that Leibniz reveals. This story is very important… You see? That creates another task for us; in fact, one would have to [inaudible] and the Chinese… Fine, fine, everything is good. So, your turn, ok. Your turn.
A student: [Inaudible content]
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, you are entirely correct in that, entirely correct, except that, here we are, how will Leibniz get out of this? I suppose… Your comment is very, very precise. You are a good reader. We have to assume that this canvas or membrum being tensed had a way or force of action, that is, the tension refers to its physics of the spring (ressort), that is, of elasticity. So if we understand the text, I would understand it in the following way: this doesn’t mean that this canvas or membrum [as] being naturally tensed, [but] it means that this canvas or membrum when it is tensed represents the state of a spring, that is, a distended spring. So when is it tensed? It is tensed when the solicitations through tiny openings give it a shock, I assume. If not, the text here then presents a small problem. You are completely right. But it’s a kind of tension that if you release it, the fold reforms itself all alone, as the spring returns to its position, you understand? Hence [we have] the idea of active force. It’s because it isn’t tensed that if something coming from outside attached itself to the [inaudible], then that tensed the fold. But notice at the same time, I am saying that there’s perhaps no point. It was… We can say what we want here, but perhaps there’s no point because you are telling me [that] the stretched canvas, it makes no folds. But yes it does! That can be a stretched fold! [Laughter] That can be a rectilinear fold. [Students reactions]
A student: That presumes the intervention of something from outside.
Deleuze: Yes, it’s what enters from below.
The student: But we can only fold something that is stretched/tensed… [inaudible words]
Deleuze: Agreed, hence there must be the solicitations from there. Yes, because, in fact, there is a fold that falls as rectilinear, that will be a stretched fold. There is the inflection fold and there is the rectilinear fold. For example, in a Gothic sculpture, the fold is rectilinear.
In Heidegger, I have the feeling that the fold is… Oh, this is too much, no. I have to review my notes. I think that it’s quite true what I am trying to tell you about Leibniz, but I have a thought in mind, that the conception of this odd word in Heidegger that returns constantly, the fold, is showing that, after all, it’s perhaps not such a bizarre notion as it appears, that it’s a notion with a very, very long philosophical history, and that the Heideggerian fold, I would almost say, is a Gothic fold, [Laughter, Deleuze as well] it’s a stretched fold, and that there are very few varieties. It’s when he still didn’t know how to manage the folds; he couldn’t create some inflection.
A student: [Question on Sartre]
Deleuze: Sartre, no, he cannot, he cannot, for a good reason, because Sartre… any reinterpretation of Sartre, who never considered commenting on Heidegger, for Sartre, the idea of the fold displeases him greatly. This is very intriguing in the anecdotic relations, because [the fold] was Merleau-Ponty’s passion. But if, during the lives of Merleau-Ponty and Sartre, before Merleau-Ponty’s death, you consider their conversation and the point of rupture regarding the phenomenology of perception, it’s quite clear. Sartre spent his time saying: subjectivity is what creates holes. The fundamental topic for Sartre is holes, it’s holes. There is a full being, and there you find what he calls little traps [lacs] of nothingness. So my question is not about knowing which is good or not, you understand; there are people who criticize Sartre saying, oh he understood nothing about Heidegger. This is idiotic because it would be valid only if Sartre had proposed understanding Heidegger. I would say that Sartre proposed to consider certain points in a methodology close to Heidegger’s. In this matter, he was convinced, and then he was trying to have something to say, and it’s not that he was right or wrong to have something to say, but well, he said it. And what he had to say moved through this dynamic of the hole. The world is like a full being, and in the world are formed, no matter how, kinds of holes, traps of non-being, that is called the pour-soi, that is, subjects. But it’s still the hole that Sartre invokes, and when he speaks of the other (autrui), he has this insolent metaphor for the other, specifically, the shithole (trou de vidange). [Laughter] The Other looks at the world and – the metaphor is lovely – an other emerges. I am there calmly watching, and then I realize that someone is looking at something other than me. Here is where my world topples, and this world that was so well organized as a function of me begins to slip away right under my nose towards the appeal of the other, and it’s absolutely as if this fluid world tipped over to the other’s side in order to disappear there into a shithole. Well, that reconciled Sartre’s miserable tendencies (le misérablisme de Sartre), he always possessed that, the force of a violent metaphor, everything went there. But there are still holes and the entire theory of nothingness (néantisation).
On this point, Heidegger and the Heideggerians get on their high horse. They say [that] Sartre understood nothing about Heidegger’s thought. Ok, but once again, that’s not a fair question. What does it mean, for example, if Descartes climbed out of his grave and said, Kant understood nothing about my thought. Obviously, Kant understood nothing of Descartes’s thought; he had a greater task than understanding Descartes’s thought. [Laughter] Fine, one does what one can. So, on the other hand, from the start Merleau-Ponty is obsessed by… He wants nothing to do with holes. It’s very strange. I mean, these are concrete things, and for that reason, there’s nothing to discuss. I cannot persuade Merleau-Ponty that holes are necessary if he doesn’t like holes. [Laughter] No, this isn’t the question. The questions is : what people create, it’s their work. It’s not about discussing, discussing. One has to tell Merleau-Ponty, fine, you don’t like holes, so do something else, something else. One has to conceive of things as axiomatics. So Sartre tosses holes into his axiomatic, holes as irreducible notions. Fine, very good. But simply put, what is he going to draw from this? If you draw nothing from it, then you have only kept holes for yourself. If it’s good, fine, you have created a lovely axiomatic.
And it’s not at all that I am indifferent to the true. I believe that truth is always there given the richness of Merleau-Ponty if we say something good. And there you are, there’s nothing to discuss. If Merleau-Ponty doesn’t want any holes, let him do something else. He creates folds, and from the start, from the end of The Phenomenology of Spirit, he says – he doesn’t seem to have a moderate position in relation to Sartre – he says, ah, I wouldn’t go so far as to say that the pour-soi creates nothingness (néantise), [that] the pour-soi punishes being. It doesn’t create holes; it creates folds. It folds being. In other words, Merleau-Ponty created a faithful portrait of Heidegger, this is obvious, and from Heidegger he retains the idea of the fold, and he thinks that Sartre follows the wrong path because he understood nothing about the importance of the fold. And once again, it’s not that I am trying to understand the importance of this or that since he has something else in mind. And for Merleau-Ponty, you then find an entire conception of the fold that he is going to develop finally in a manner rather distant from Heidegger’s. He will take his distance from him as well. That doesn’t prevent him from being infinitely closer to Heidegger than Sartre ever was, and because of this idea of the fold, that he is going to develop in a very strange way – in the idea of a chiasmus, an optical chiasmus, you know, of a crossing of folds, there’s a kind of crossing, all that.
But what I would like to bring forth this year is this miniscule point, that perhaps the whole problem that is linked too much to the Heideggerian ontology, is very, very old, and that as in sculpture, we have always had folds. I mean, one doesn’t create sculpture without creating folds. Whether these are folds of flesh or folds of clothing, one could say that sculpture is the art of the fold, in a certain way, why not? But it’s obvious, not to be confused, it’s enough to look at the fronts of churches. You will not mistake a Romanesque fold from a Gothic fold. And moreover, you will not mistake a Roman fold for a Greek fold. My hypothesis is all the more strengthened, that truly the fold treated for itself, the autonomy of the fold, and this is Baroque. That’s what the Baroque is. The Baroque operation is the fold going to infinity. Thus it is no longer the rectilinear Gothic fold; one would have to define the Romanesque fold, and that would be very difficult, which we could if we had a specialist in sculpture. And you know, everything is yet to be done, right? We realize that things are quite wonderful because we cannot say at the same time that people are not working. They work enormously. But everything is left to be done. It would seem obvious that in sculpture, there are things created on the fold in stone. That seems to be a good topic.
So I am looking for the words in order to call up some specialists, and each time, it is painful. It’s quite rare [to find] specialists who know how to answer a simple question. I ask if there is… I am sure that there are great art critics who are working on the fold in sculpture.
Pinhas: [Suggestion to Deleuze that compares what he is doing with the fold with reference to Heidegger and what he had done with duration in Bergson]
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Look, what strikes me, the way that someone… What does it mean to be systematic, that is, to be a philosopher? That doesn’t at all mean bringing everything back to a single, set idea; it doesn’t mean that at all. First, this implies having so many ideas, lots of ideas, and it’s tiring having lots of ideas. But it’s true that it’s about discovering resemblances between absolutely disparate things; it’s only about finding disparate things so strangely within an aggregate.
So, imagine Leibniz. He is obsessed by something, for example – and here I can end on this in order… It’s almost a conclusion for this interminable first part [of the course] – the veins of marble. These veins of marble pleased him greatly. If you find in a text by Descartes or Malebranche an allusion to veins of marble, on one hand, that would astound me, and on the other hand, I bet this [reference] will be anecdotal and exterior. When it’s Leibniz, you understand immediately that for him it’s the formulation of a thousand essential ideas, that veins of marble will become a sign of four or five ideas that arouse him. Marble has veins, so what does this mean? Well, it means that there are inflections in marble, first of all. And second, it means that inflections are included in marble, and this provides him with an entire basis for great interest. Third, it means that there are pleats in marble. Veins in marble designate the pleats of matter.  And fourth, when Leibniz speaks to us about innate ideas, that is, ideas that reasonable souls discover in them and that do not come from the outside, like 2 and 2 make 4, he tells us what? He says that innate ideas are in power of action (en puissance) in souls as figures are in power of action in the marble worked on by the sculptor. That is, veins of marble are no longer pleats of matter, but are virtual figures that are in the soul, that is, these are folds in the soul. That is, my two kinds of fold can refer to the image of veins in marble. So this is something rather obsessive. I was telling you about mines, yes, but veins of marble are even better: they cover both floors, the upper floor and the lower floor. Veins of marble prefigure the figures that can be drawn out of the marble block. This is one case. A second case: on the level of matter, they prefigure the pleats of matter. The world is fundamentally marbled. To say that the world is fundamentally marbled means that marble is not simply something in the world. It is the figure of the world. In other words, it is already this movement of inflection and of inclusion. [End of the session] [1:21:57]
 
Lecture 6, 13 January 1987: Sufficient Reason & the Three Forms of Inclusion 
Part 1
The general theme of this second part is something like Principles and Freedom. And as much on the level of principles as on the level of freedom, we should have expected that we would find these currents of folding (plissement), of the fold and the envelope. The perpetual theme of principles, in fact, will be that of implication, and of course, implication is the logical notion that, we might say, circulates all over. But at the point where we find ourselves, and this is certainly why the first part of the course was so long and detailed, we now can expect correctly that when Leibniz uses even classical terms, expressions emptied of their proper sense as logical implication, we should expect that that the word completely regains its liveliest and most rigorous sense. Implicate is to envelop, it is to fold into. Perhaps all sorts of words might be suited to resonate according to their most literal sense. If implication, to some extent, presents itself as a logics of the multiple, isn’t this to the extent that the multiple is also… What is the multiple? It’s what is folded in many different ways. In Latin, [it’s] multiplex. [Pause] This is very important, the suffix, which is a suffix of folding. The labyrinth is multiple. What does that mean? It means not only that there are lots of paths. The labyrinth is multiple: that means that the labyrinth is this structure that is folded in many different ways. And when we say the word “multiple”, today, we no longer think much about the suffix –ex, that is, the fold. But Leibniz is entirely correct to consider this and to cause us to do so as well.
And this is true for Freedom. When Leibniz tells us, you understand that freedom, this story of freedom is not very difficult. He will tell us that he was accused of suppressing freedom, of not taking freedom into account, of submitting man to a determinism or a causality that suppresses freedom, all that. But this is not at all true since, as I have always said, he tells us that to be free is to be inclined (incline) without being a necessity. We ourselves are therefore entirely prepared to take seriously this term from Leibniz, to incline (incliner). To incline is to fold oneself; inclination is inflection. Being free is to inflect oneself. Fine. It’s probable in all that the most current terms – multiple, inclination, etc. – are going to be loaded by Leibniz – implication – are going to be loaded by Leibniz with a valorized and concrete content, and all of these valorized, concrete contents are going to organized under the principle that Leibniz correctly thinks of himself as having invented, to the point that he presents his entire philosophy under the seal of this principle. And after all, what greater ambition [is there] for a philosopher than to invent a principle? Leibniz not only invents one principle; he invents all kinds, as many as you’d like, and the principle that he considers himself to have invented and that constitutes the very illustration of his philosophy is what he names the principle of sufficient reason.[2] And it’s from this principle that we should start for our examination of this second part.
What does sufficient reason mean, that Leibniz constantly invokes, both because he invokes the principle of sufficient reason and because he will reproach all his adversaries, without exceptions, that is, anyone not a Leibnizian – and there’s only one Leibnizian, Leibniz – well, he reproaches everyone for violating the principle of sufficient reason? He will tell everyone: you just don’t see it; you are violating the principle of sufficient reason. So what is this principle of sufficient reason? Here, the key word is “sufficient”, and fortunately, we also have for the principle of sufficient reason a common [vulgaire] formulation, an entirely simple formulation. The common formulation that we find in so many of Leibniz’s texts, in Leibniz to speak rapidly, is “everything has a reason.” You’ll say, “Everything has a reason”? Ok… Or more accurately, everything that occurs has a reason; everything that occurs has a reason.
And already here, this interests me greatly because we have no right to go too quickly on this level: that the principle of sufficient reason in its most traditional, most common, simplest expression refers to what occurs. Why? This I will tell you immediately; I have to say it immediately so that, if you will, you might follow my problem. It’s that there is a traditional idea in… with many of Leibniz’s commentators, a general idea, asserting that Leibniz reduced all judgments to judgments of attribution. What is a judgment of attribution? It’s a judgment consisting of a subject, the copula, that is, the verb “to be”, and an attribute as an adjective: “the sky is blue” is a judgment of attribution. You attribute a quality to a subject through the intermediary of the copula “to be”. You see? And they act as if it went without saying that Leibniz reduces judgment to judgment of attribution. We will be considering this problem for quite a while, but let me say from the start that we have to say that there’s something disturbing here. What is it? It lies in confronting this attribution structure with the statement of sufficient reason. The principle of sufficient reason – I mean, everything that occurs has a reason – what is it that occurs? What occurs we call the event.
In other words, sufficient reason presents itself as the reason of something that occurs or the reason of the event. But a quality is not an event, and event is not a quality. Understand, I mean [that] I don’t want to conclude more than this for the moment: specifically, it’s not at all certain that the principle of sufficient reason – in any case, we have no reason to consider it as certain – that the principle of sufficient reason results in the reduction of judgment to a judgment of attribution. In its simplest statement, the principle of sufficient reason only says [that] everything that occurs has a reason. What occurs comes under the order of the event. What is an event? We have seen it. The entire first part of our course serves us here. An event is a fold, that is, an inflection. [Pause] That’s the status of the event. To locate an attribute here seems to me already extremely exaggerated. The event is something that occurs, which means an inflection.
Henceforth, what does that mean, everything that occurs has a reason, every event has a reason, understood as a sufficient reason? Does it mean that everything has a cause? No, clearly not, because Leibniz could not in that case pretend to be the inventor of the principle of sufficient reason. Why? If it’s a cause, it’s something that occurs and causes to occur. It’s something that causes to occur and, if it occurs itself… If I heat water to 100 degrees [Celsius], it starts to boil. I would say about a cause that it is necessary, but not absolutely sufficient. [Pause] A cause occurs or doesn’t occur. It is not the reason for what occurs. [Pause] To have a cause is not a reason, but must itself have a reason. This we understand quite well in saying that causality is by nature hypothetical. If A is given, then B. I would say about cause that necessary reason is not sufficient. Sufficient reason demands for the event and for its causes a reason that would be called sufficient. I say, cause is a category of the event. Cause occurs to a thing. Sufficient reason demands a reason for everything that occurs. It demands a sufficient reason for the event, for the causes of the event, for the constitutive relations of the event, for the moment in which the event occurs, for the location where the event appears. It’s possible that every event necessarily has causes, that is, necessarily has a location and a moment, but that is not sufficient reason.
So, henceforth, what will we say? We pass into a metaphysical formulation of sufficient reason, which will be what? The common formulation was, everything that occurs has a reason. The metaphysical or philosophical formulation, if you have followed me, will be…? Sufficient reason is the concept or notion of the thing insofar as it accounts for everything that happens to the thing. You see, all alone, quite spontaneously, I have passed from the common formulation to the metaphysical formulation: sufficient reason is the concept or notion of the thing insofar as it accounts for everything that happens to the thing, of everything that happens. I have conserved within the metaphysical formulation the fundamental notion of the event. So the concept, sufficient reason, is not the cause of the thing, or the cause of what happens to the thing; sufficient reason can only be the concept of the thing insofar as it contains the reason for everything that occurs to the thing.
This shouldn’t surprise us, right, especially not us, since this metaphysical formulation is a new way of saying from inflection to inclusion, from inflection to inherence, from inflection to the fold’s envelope, to the envelope. You recall, in fact, that inflection is the event that occurs to a thing. Every event is an inflection. I am born, I die, I write, I get cold, etc., are inflections. An event occurs to something or to someone. Inflection is the event insofar as it occurs to something or someone. Inclusion is what? We saw that what happens to something is encompassed, contained, included – here, follow closely the distinction of notions, not the thing, which would have no sense – is included in the concept of the thing. What occurs to something is included in the concept of the thing. What occurs to something is included in the concept of the thing. In other words, the event that happens to the thing is a predicate of its notion. The predicate is what? The predicate is what is said about the notion, what is linked in the notion, what is included in the notion. The event that happens to the thing is a predicate included in the notion of the thing. Hence the metaphysical formulation that Leibniz gives of sufficient reason: every predication is a foundation in the nature of things. [Pause] From this we can easily conclude the third formulation of the principle of sufficient reason, the logical formulation. This time, the logical formulation of sufficient reason [is] every predicate is included in the notion of the thing. [Pause]
But you see? What little I have said, what I’d like you to understand, is solely… I don’t want you to understand something special, but in fact, that you take part in my own sense of doubt. By what right in all this [can anyone] pretend that Leibniz reduces judgment to a judgment of attribution of the “the sky is blue” kind? The whole topic that we have just seen from Leibniz consists in telling us [that] the event that occurs to the thing, this means something entirely different from a quality, entirely different from an attribute. The event that happens to the thing is a predicate included in the notion of the thing, which absolutely does not imply that the predicate might be an attribute [Pause] that would be attributable to the notion of the thing by the intermediary of the copula. I state [that] I write; to make of this a judgment of attribution, one would have to say, I am writing (je suis écrivant). This is well known. So we are often told that Leibniz, that Leibniz’s theory implies this reduction, of I write to I am writing. That would be odd; there’s something [Deleuze looks for his words…] of… One must say, which is quite pleasing, that… You understand? There’s a principle here, nonetheless…. Even for great philosophers, if that’s what they meant, they would have said it. If he [Leibniz] had meant to say all judgment of the event, any event-al proposition (proposition événementielle) of the kind “I write” comes down to a judgment of attribution, this wouldn’t be all that complicated. He would have said it. I am going to tell you why he would have said it because you know very well about these matters (trucs). It’s a theory popular in that era, notably we find it in all the grammars of the seventeenth century. In all these seventeenth century grammars, we find the question of knowing to what extent I can reduce “I write” to “I am writing.” Moreover, I can affirm that Leibniz know perfectly well about all these doctrines, and in the philological notes, he wrote quite a lot about philology and grammar. In the grammatical and philological notes, he explicitly considered this.
Fine. My question is quite simple: if that is what Leibniz meant to say, while he was perfectly aware of all this, why in his text on sufficient reason would he never refer to this reduction? And the fact is that, concerning sufficient reason, he never referred to any reduction whatsoever of the event to an attribute, never. In other words, what he considers as predicate is not the attribute through the intermediary of the copula “to be”. What he considers as predicate is the aggregate of the verb – to write, to be born, to die – without ever reducing it to the verb “to be” plus attribute, whereas this reduction, once again, he considered it in his philological texts. But when it’s a question of sufficient reason – all this, we will have to take account of this. For those who know a bit about what occurred subsequently, all the criticisms made against Leibniz, with the great moments of a critique of Leib… of Leibnizianism [Deleuze looks for the word] – the first great moment [is] with Kant, the second great moment [is] with [Bertrand] Russell, at the basis of modern logic – that consists in reproaching Leibniz for having reduced or having wanted to reduce relations and event to simple attributes. We have every reason to think that this critique is entirely unfair because, once again, no text by Leibniz goes in this direction.
So, all that we can draw from this at the moment is this: [Deleuze speaks extremely slowly] once it’s given that something occurs to a subject, what occurs to a subject must be encompassed, included in the notion of this subject; in other words, inflection, the event, is a predicate of the notion, but predicate does not mean attribute. This predicate is the verb, and in fact, the verb is the sign of the inflection: I write, I’m cold, etc. … Yes? Who’s calling me?
A student: [Question regarding the commentators on Leibniz, how they could repeat these propositions regarding Leibniz]
Deleuze: Yes, yes, because they had some evil intentions in mind. [Laughter] That’s in his works; we have Leibniz’s texts. Understand where the problem is: we have Leibniz’s texts in which, in fact, he considers this famous reduction from judgment to judgment of identity. He isn’t against it; he is… Logically, we will see, we will see what these texts mean. But precisely, he never refers to that, never, on the level of sufficient reason. So really, one shouldn’t exaggerate. Never did he tell us, when speaking about sufficient reason, he says, I write, I write. My notion has to contain, to envelop the reason for “I write”, that is, this act. But he would never say that this act, I write, is I am writing, that is, the copula plus attribute.
All that we can draw from sufficient reason is: everything that occurs assumes an inclusion in the notion. Everything that occurs to something has for sufficient reason the inclusion in the notion, the envelopment in the notion. Do you understand this? I don’t need, it seems to me, to insist on this greatly since all this was the focus of the entire first part of our course, once again, from inflection to inclusion. Sufficient reason is inclusion as the reason for inflection. Everything that occurs is a predicate contained in the notion of the thing to which, to whom that happens. You immediately see what this notion is. You recall the thing to which this occurs, the notion of the thing to which something occurs; it’s what he called the monad. Fine. Hence, sufficient reason is: any predicate is in the subject where – now, when we say any predicate is in the subject, you’ll correct this yourselves, rigorously, it’s “any predicate is in the notion of the subject” – any predicate is in the notion of the subject, or if you prefer, truth has only one model; truth is inclusion. Truth is inclusion ; it’s inherence. [Pause]
There we have it. Is everything good? I can continue ? There aren’t any difficulties because this has to be clear, eh? All that I am suggesting is that he pushes us towards a logic of the event and not toward a logics of the attribute. It’s a logic of the event. It’s so little a logic of the attribute that it’s the others who are creating a logic of the attribute. At the outside, I can say, and we will see, we will see… It’s quite odd, this whole story. In the end, it interests me a lot because… A logic of the attribute, truly, comes from Aristotle. I am not saying that Aristotle was satisfied with a logic of the attribute, but it’s true that from Aristotle comes a logics of the attribute. But you know, logic is such a complex domain. A logic of the attribute hardly goes without saying since, for example, it will be a very great moment in the history of logics when, in their reactions against Aristotle – and they’re the ones, to my knowledge, that start all this – the Stoics invent a logics of the event. A logic of the event, on what basis? No, what occurs cannot be reduced to an attribute. [Pause]
And this small parenthesis, to finish up all this: it’s no little thing if that gets completely mixed up. The Stoics are the first philosophers to put into question the copula “to be” and to deny that the model of judgment is the attributive model, that is, subject-copula-attribute. For this, they will substitute the strangest and most unusual logic ever, that they themselves are going to present as a logic of the event. Fine. So I am simply saying, because it will be confirmed – I won’t be able to confirm it until later – that Leibniz resituates himself within the Stoics’ problem. In what sense? Precisely as a function of the logics of the event that they were in the process of establishing, Stoicism had to come into collision with a fascinating problem, and you are going to see henceforth how the principles and freedom form a problem in which everything is knotted, connected. They inevitably had to settle down to face the problem that concerns what was called future events. What is the sense of a proposition of the kind, “a naval battle will take place tomorrow”? This is the famous problem that, with the Stoics, will receive the name of contingent futures. In other words, is a proposition like “a naval battle will take place tomorrow” true or false, or else neither true, nor false? You see that freedom, the problem, it’s a way of posing the problem of freedom. And, Leibniz will rediscover, and he will no doubt be the first to discover integrally, this problem of contingent futures, the extent to which it’s a logic of the event and not a logic of the attribute.
And the great criticism that the Stoics make against Aristotle is to have completely misunderstood the status, the mode of existence of the event. The event is irreducibly an attribute of the thing. The event is inseparable from the verb as such. That also implies an entire grammar, an entire… If it’s inseparable from the verb as such, I cannot translate “I run” with “I am running” (je suis courant); I cannot translate “I write” with “I am writing” (écrivant). You understand well that, in this, there is a way to reduce the event to what it is not, that is, a simple quality. Fine.
Is this understood? Where I am right now is uniquely with this: sufficient reason is inclusion in the notion, and above all, don’t believe that inclusion in the notion implies the reduction of judgment to judgment of attribution. There is no reason to think this. Period, final. That’s as far as I have gotten. By virtue of which I am telling you, are you doing ok? [Rires] Yes? All good? This has to be very clear, right ? It’s a bit abstract. Fine, so let’s continue, let’s continue. [Pause]
The truth of a proposition is the inclusion of the predicate in the notion. And here we see, Leibniz says to us – there, I ask you… It’s almost… Our session today is to number the texts and… — And here we have Leibniz telling us: only, only, there are two kinds of inclusion, there are two kinds of inclusion of the predicate in the notion, and these two kinds correspond to two kinds of proposition.[3] [Pause]
The first kind – here arise questions of terminology, so we will indeed have to settle them, but you will see [Deleuze laughs], it’s not, it’s not entirely possible – he tells us: in the first case, inclusion is express. [Pause] In Latin, when in the Latin texts, he uses the verb expresser. Inclusion is express. The corresponding propositions or the corresponding truths are truths of essence. These are truths of essence, an essence. They have this for characteristic: that the contrary implies contradiction. Example: 2 plus 2 make 4, or rather he passes through here to say: 2 and 2 are 4.
A second kind of inclusion: here, inclusion is, in Latin, implicit, impliciter. It’s implicit. In French, in French texts, [it’s] virtual, and this time, it concerns what he calls truths of existence or of fact, or of event. The fact is that… Truth of existence or fact or event. [Pause] And the contrary does not imply contradiction. Example: Caesar crosses the Rubicon. I write. Adam sinned. See, all that, these are events. [Pause] Fine.
From here onward, this appears relatively simple. This distinction of truths of essence and truths of existence, two types of inclusion, we are again going to find ourselves faced with a nest of difficulties, if we look at the texts, if you attach any importance to the letter of the text. Why difficulties? It’s odd the expression that appears in French, virtual, since if inclusion is virtual in the judgments of existence, that is, if crossing the Rubicon is a predicate, which is only virtually contained, included in the notion of Caesar, one must believe, on the other hand, that in the truths of essence inclusion is actual. How is it that Leibniz never said that? At first glance, if it’s a question of developing an opposition between truths of essence and truths of existence, well then, the opposition actual-virtual, since inclusion is said to be virtual in truths of existence, we would expect there to be an actual-virtual opposition. And no, he does not at all state this. Fine, the opposition is exactly between express and implicit. Implicit is virtual; express is explicit. Fine.
There is already a tiny little something that bothers us: virtual, virtual, what is that, this word “virtual”? In Leibniz, he feels no need to oppose it to actual. I am going to tell you why he cannot oppose it to actual – so why does he use virtual, that would be another question. He cannot oppose it to actual because, for a simple reason, it’s that in Leibniz’s works, everything is actual, and everything is in act. But then, why, why then the virtual? He indeed says “virtual”, but we have to believe that he understands virtual in a very special sense, and it’s up to us to find it. In any case, that does not mean an opposition with actual. So, if he doesn’t oppose actual and virtual, it’s for a simple reason. When he uses the word “virtual”, he doesn’t oppose it to actual because everything is in act, even the virtual. So that relieves us, but it doesn’t explain much. Let’s continue.
We could say that to better understand, and it’s been said a thousand times, to better understand the two types of opposition, that of express inclusion, or that of virtual, implicit exclusion, we could say, fine, it’s not difficult. In one case, inclusion can be grasped as an outcome of a finite number of operations, and in the other case, inclusion can only be grasped as an outcome of an infinite number of operations. [Pause] This comes down to saying, in the case of truths of essence, the analysis that shows inclusion of the predicate in the subject – it’s an analysis that shows this inclusion, obviously – well then, in the case of truths of essence, the analysis that shows inclusion in the subject is finite, and in the case of truths of existence, an infinite analysis is required in order to show inclusion of the predicate, crossing the Rubicon, in the subject Caesar, the notion of Caesar. [Pause] Well, yes, why not? So come on, this isn’t right. We cannot say that… [Interruption of the recording] [46:33]
 
Part 2
… Even if we don’t at all yet understand what that means, grant me that they [truths of essence] are very close to God. Why? They obviously belong to the understanding of God. In a certain vague way, I could say that they belong to God, much more closely, than the truths of existence. No doubt any truth belongs to God, but truths of essence belong to God much more immediately. They are much closer to God. They belong to his understanding, whereas [with] truths of existence, you sense already how it [God] is going to distribute things. The truths of existence no doubt belong to the understanding, but to another part of God’s understanding, and especially they put into play its [God’s] will, whereas the truths of essence don’t put into play God’s will. They belong to the deepest part of its [God’s] understanding.
And God is the infinite being par excellence. No matter, let’s grant it all that. Henceforth, how do you want truths of essence to be defined by the finite number of operations that their inclusion implies, that the initiation of their inclusion implies? It’s not possible. I cannot say, the propositions of essence are those in which the predicate is included in the subject as an outcome of a finite number of operations. I can’t. There is something wrong here. There’s something that would be profoundly shocking since the truths of essence are in God’s understanding who is the infinite creature par excellence and since, moreover, the infinite is a … The finite for Leibniz is an imperfection. The finite is an imperfection. How do you want truths of essence that are superior truths, of the “2 and 2 make 4” kind, to be defined by their finitude? This wouldn’t be serious. This wouldn’t be at all reasonable. In other words, I cannot define the truths of essence by the finite number of operations that would solicit their inclusion.
On the other hand, can I define truths of existence by the virtual, in the current sense of the word “virtual”, that is, by indefinite? That would come down to saying that inclusion of the subject in the predicate of truths of existence would go to infinity. There would always be an intermediary. Moreover, it’s when I would reach the intermediary, there would be another intermediary. To connect “crossing the Rubicon” to the concept of Caesar, there would be an indefinite series. No, once again, I cannot say it. I cannot say it since, for Leibniz, there is only the infinite, and not indefinite. And furthermore, we must wait for Kant in order to give the indefinite a status, and he will do this against Leibniz. So, it’s impossible to say that. And why is it impossible to say that? Because if I said it’s indefinite, I would mean that it’s indefinite for me, but God sees. I would say [that] God sees quite well. The inclusion of “crossing the Rubicon” into Caesar, I myself don’t see it because it’s indefinite for me. But God does see, and it’s here that Leibniz is rigorous. One cannot say that.
In a very lovely text called On Freedom, Leibniz tells us, well no, “God no more than us sees the end of the operation or the resolution.” Why? Because by definition, there is no end. The inclusion of passing the Rubicon into Caesar or into the concept of Caesar goes to infinity, but it’s this way for God as it is for man. That text is very important because, in fact, it’s a… Leibniz here has the advantage of denouncing a misinterpretation that one might always risk making. The resolution, that is, the resolution of the predicate in the subject, in the concept of the subject, the resolution of passing the Rubicon into Caesar, the resolution proceeds to infinity, in the case of truths of existence. The resolution proceeds to infinity, that is, God alone sees. God alone sees. He [Leibniz] adds: “not indeed the end of the analysis (résolution)”. See, if the resolution were indefinite, I could say [that] God sees the end, but no. The resolution goes to infinity; it proceeds to infinity. Henceforth, God alone sees, certainly not the end of the resolution, “since it has no end”. If the resolution goes to infinity, it has no end. So no more God than we can see the end; simply, I can say that God is like a fish in the water in the infinite, whereas we are completely lost in the infinite. That’s the sole difference. But [God] does not see the end any more [than we do]. By definition, the infinite is what has no end. So God alone sees, certainly not the end of the resolution, and end that does not take place, “but it [God] sees the connection of terms”, crossing the Rubicon and Caesar, “it sees the connection of terms as the envelopment of the predicate in the subject,” as the envelopment of the predicate in the subject.
Fine, that gives us a small indication, a tiny glimmer. We already saw all the ways in which we weren’t able to understand all that. And notice, these ways are beginning to add up. We cannot understand Leibniz as if he reduced the event to the attribute. We cannot understand the distinction of the two inclusions as if the first were finite – this is false – and as if the second were indefinite – this is false. But, according to this text that I just read, what must we say? Inclusion is an envelopment; 2 and 2 envelop 4. There are two kinds of inclusion. 2 and 2 envelop 4; Caesar, the concept of Caesar envelops the crossing of the Rubicon, envelops crossing the Rubicon. [Pause] I would say that in the first case, truths of essence, inclusion or envelopment is, it seems not to yield anything for us, so we can move on. I can say [that] in the case of truths of essence, inclusion allows itself to be unfolded. Inclusion is unfoldable (dépliable), developable. In the case of truths of existence, there is indeed inclusion, but it doesn’t allow itself to be unfolded. It stays enveloped. It’s non-unfoldable (indépliable). “God sees not indeed the end of the analysis”, but he sees the envelopment. He [Leibniz] does not tell us that it develops, whereas on the level of truths of essence, the envelopment allows itself to be developed.  There are developable truths and truths that remain enveloped. [Pause]
Fine, this is just a little… What are we going to be able to draw from such a thin and metaphorical clue, developing, enveloping, all that? What are inclusions that allow themselves to be developed, unfolded, and inclusions that do not allow themselves to be unfolded? You sense perhaps that this orients us toward the necessity of creating a logic of inclusion in such a way that we might be drawn to distinguish some kinds of inclusions. And here it all returns to us. Henceforth, we will again have to examine the distinction of two kinds of truth. And there again, in the text On Freedom to which I referred earlier, we hardly reach… You see that things are going to become a bit clearer. For us, something important (terrible) is occurring here, something important. [Deleuze peruses the text while speaking]
In On Freedom, he restarts his story of the two kinds of truth, truths of essence and truths of existence, that is, there are two kinds of inclusion. So good, fine, and there he tells us generally that yes, there are unfoldable inclusions and non-unfoldable inclusions. Yes. And then we are going to look a bit at the first case, the truths of essence with the unfoldable inclusions. He tells us that it’s necessary in this to distinguish some very different cases, to which we say, so much the better, the more distinctions there are, the better it is. He then continues, saying there are two cases, at least two cases, in truths of essence. Notice that it’s not the two kinds – truths of essence and truths of existence –, but this is two cases in the truths of essence. He tells us that there is a case in which inclusion is explicit and a case in which inclusion is only implicit or virtual. [Pause] I am reading rather quickly because… I am reading quickly a first time because it’s an initial grounding point. We will then return to the text, so listen closely.
“To demonstrate” — this concerns the truths of essence — “to demonstrate is nothing other than resolving the terms of a proposition and substituting a definition for the terms defined.” All this matters little, so you can just let yourself go, not asking yourself at all what this means. “We discern therefore the coincidence of the predicate with the subject in a reciprocal proposition.” Fine. “But in other cases”, but in other cases, understand well, it’s not a question of truths of existence; it’s about another case in truths of essence. On this point, the text raises no problems since truths of essence [logically Deleuze means truths of existence] will be considered in the following paragraph. This whole paragraph explicitly concerns truths of essence.
He begins by distinguishing two cases. The first case: “to demonstrate is nothing other than resolving the terms of a proposition and substituting a definition for the terms defined.” So in this way we find “the coincidence of the predicate with the subject in a reciprocal proposition.” But in the other cases, it’s at least in order to extract an inclusion so that what is virtual in the proposition and contained within a certain power (puissance) becomes evident and expressed through the demonstration. He gives an example; for example, therefore, for these cases of inclusions called virtual, for example, if we understand by ternary or senary or duodenary number that which can be divided by 3, 6, or 12 – a ternary number, is for example 9 that can be divided by 3. A senary number is a number like 24, for example, divisible by 6, etc. Well, if you understand by senary or ternary or duodenary number one that can be divided by 3, 6 or 12, we can demonstrate this proposition: any duodenary number (divisible by 12) – we can demonstrate this proposition – any duodenary number (divisible by 12) is senary (divisible by 6), and he goes on to the demonstration to which we will return later. You see, we are fully within the truths of essence. And he tells us this is a special case of truths of essence in which the inclusion is only virtual or implicit.
So you understand that a huge feeling of joy arises when we come upon a text like that; there’s nothing to be done. [Deleuze laughs] I tell myself, ok, we thought we had understood. If you compare – here, I don’t want us to lose too much time with this — but those who want to can refer to the Discourse on Metaphysics in which, in the Discourse on Metaphysics, everything is very firm: “virtual” is used for propositions of existence, and explicit or express for propositions of essence, period, that’s it. That’s in the Discourse on Metaphysics. The treatise On Freedom returns to the distinction of two kinds of truth, but we must believe that it gets complicated since he distinguished as firmly as in the Discourse on Metaphysics two kinds of truth. Only he uses the word “implicit” or “virtual” for one case of the truths of essence. You understand? All this makes me state up front that there are only two kinds of inclusions. We will certainly have to find a third, three types of inclusion. [Pause] Three types of inclusion… Perhaps even more. Fine. Perhaps even more. It would even be better if there were more. So, we’ll go on to find four… Four. [Laughter] Four types of inclusion.
There we are. Is this ok? It’s very abstract, but it will become more concrete. Today I am in need of a lot of abstractions.
Do you see what he means? I am indicating [that] here we have the great distinctions, truths of essence, truths of existence. I haven’t said it concretely enough. He says, well yes, in the case of truths of essence, the contrary is impossible, that is, the contrary is contradictory, contradictory in itself. That 2 and 2 don’t make 4 is contradictory. This is impossible, whereas in the case of truths of existence, no, that Adam didn’t sin is not contradictory. I can very well conceive of Adam not sinning. I cannot conceive of a square circle; I cannot conceive of 2 and 2 making 5. I can say it, but I cannot support it with anything, whereas I can very well conceive of Adam not sinning. It’s about wanting the presence… It’s one of the bases for the distinction of two kinds of truth.
So then, I come back to my necessity. It’s just that… There is just a distressing moment here, today, this morning. I am confronting this distressing moment very fast, so that you… that I’d like to address quickly because it is indispensable. You’ll see, if needed, what you can retain from this. I am coming back to truths of essence. I say, fine, there is inclusion, but inclusion of what in what? 2 and 2 are 4, is what? What is the inclusion? Well, Leibniz tells us a very simple thing, which will have importance for modern logic. He says, to demonstrate means what? Truths of essence are demonstrable truths. To demonstrate means what? To demonstrate is to define, that is, it’s the linkage of definitions. And mathematics is the linkage of definitions. What is a definition? So here we have our first kind of inclusion; we hadn’t expected to come to it so quickly. I’d say that a definition is a reciprocal inclusion; it’s a reciprocal inclusion. There is a reciprocal inclusion between the defined and the definition. [Pause] Linking up definitions is demonstrating. What does that mean? Well, it’s unfolding a series of inclusions; [Pause] it’s unfolding a series of reciprocal inclusions. An example – he really loves learned examples, learned mathematical examples – he says, how does one demonstrate that 2 and 2 are 4? [Look at] New Essays on Human Understanding, where we see in book IV, chapter 7, what a demonstration is, that is, a linkage of definitions.[4] It’s a matter of demonstrating that 2 and 2 are 4, that’s it.
First definition: 2 is 1 and 1; 2 is 1 and 1. You’ll say, what does that mean? It’s the definition of 2, right, 1 and 1. That seems like nothing, and if you reflect on this, why then, why don’t I say instead that 2, eh, 2 is 6 divided by 3? [Laughter] That could be the definition. I can even create an axiomatic, in which I define 2 by if it’s divided by 3, on the sole condition that I could define 6 and 3 without all that, and in this case, that would be quite… I can always… I can do whatever. But no, this is not just any definition. When I say 2 is 1 and 1, why? It’s a real definition, whereas when I define 2 by the product of dividing 6 by 3, it’s not a real definition, it’s a nominal definition, of the form: I am calling 2 this. What is the difference between a real definition and a nominal definition? All these things are what you have to know by heart. A nominal definition is a definition that allows us to recognize its object; a real definition is a definition that shows us the possibility of its object. Notice that in the complicated problem of the relations of demonstration and definition in most cases, we are led to demonstrate that the definition is real. One must show that the definition reveals the possibility of its object.
Why is “2 is 1 and 1” a real definition and the only real definition for 2? I am making you endure… Well it’s quite simple! It’s because you define it by the primary numbers that 2 envelops. You define 2 by its primary factors, 1 and 1. [Pause] Right? There is no other definition of 2 by primary factors, except by itself, as we’ll see. This will be Leibniz’s idea: to obtain real definitions for numbers, one has to decompose them into primary factors; one has to decompose them into primary numbers. When you decompose a number into primary numbers, you have the real definition of the number. So, definition, 2 is 1 and 1. There you are. You have to take notes if you want to follow me well because this very simple example… [Deleuze doesn’t complete the sentence]
Second definition: 3 is 2 and 1; here we have a definition of 3. Why? Because it’s the decomposition of 3 into primary factors. Third definition: 4 is 3 and 1, here again the decomposition into primary factors. These are three definitions.
I am saying that to demonstrate is a linkage of definitions. In fact, we are demonstrating that 2 and 2 are 4. How do we demonstrate this? First proposition: “2 and 2” is 2 and 1 and 1, by virtue of definition 1. – Yes, that makes no sense if you don’t note it down; either you listen vaguely, or you note it down. Have you noted down the three definitions? Do I need to reread them? First definition: 2 is 1 and 1; second definition: 3 is 2 and 1; third definition: 4 is 3 and 1. — Demonstration, first proposition: “2 and 2” is 2 and 1 and 1, by virtue of definition 1. In fact, in 2 and 2, you keep one 2 and the other 2, you place the defined there [with] the definer, that is 1 and 1. “2 and 2” is 2 and 1 and 1, by virtue of definition1. Second proposition: “2 and 1 and 1” is 3 and 1, by virtue of definition 2. Third proposition: “3 and 1” is 4 by virtue of definition 3.
So how do we make sense of that? Just grasp that we’re in a completely modern atmosphere. I mean that it’s really modern logics; indeed, it’s modern logics. One would necessarily need many pages; we’d need a storeroom of pages and pages in order to … to demonstrate things of the “2 and 2 make 4” kind. And Leibniz is very important in this regard, I mean, because there are all kinds of polemics occurring with mathematicians of the era. Leibniz really maintains this, the attempt at demonstrating valid actions. So, lots of mathematicians of the era state that “2 and 2 make 4” is a valid action. No, not at all; he wants his chain of definitions, and he wants the idea – thus the absolutely modern idea if you think about all of logics currently – [that] demonstration is a linkage of definitions. One can even say that it’s like the action of establishing modern logics. So at this level, I’d ask, what have I done? Well, I am going from one definition to another. I am linking up definitions, each one being a reciprocal inclusion, the reciprocal inclusion of the defined and the definition. Ok? Fine, linking reciprocal inclusions is what demonstrating is.
And up to what point do I link them? That gets complicated there. Why? Because I really have to attain some primary terms. I really have to reach some primary terms. What does primary terms mean, ultimate terms? And why does one have to…? Ultimate terms are terms that are no longer definable, terms no longer definable. What is a term that is no longer definable? It’s a term that is nothing other than identical with itself. I cannot define it. Why can’t I define it? Because it only includes itself. A term that only includes itself cannot be the object of a reciprocal inclusion. I would say that a term that includes only itself refers to an auto-inclusion. It includes nothing other than itself. A is A: it’s an Identical. An Identical is an auto-inclusion., and you must define them and distinguish them, the Definables that are reciprocal inclusions and the Identicals that are inclusions, auto-inclusions, henceforth undefinable. An Identical is undefinable, from which comes the subject in Leibniz, in the truths of essence, [in which] everything proceeds through definition and Identicals. [Pause] You see what he means? Well yes, it’s not definable; there will indeed be primary terms. An undefinable term is a term that only includes itself. Example, let’s see if we can give some examples. Well then, a term that only includes itself is what we call an Identical. Well why? I continue to insist that an Identical includes only itself, an auto-inclusion.[5] [Pause]
From the time he was very young, Leibniz conceived of something he called the Combinatory, and what is this Combinatory? It means not to define, but to determine the Identicals. We will see what that means, but I insist: in a domain under consideration, for example, the Identicals in geometry, in other words, auto-inclusions, the undefinable notions, he makes a list of them. Let us take a point, [Deleuze goes to the board and draws] see, the point, let’s assume that this is undefinable, an auto-inclusion. The line would not be an auto-inclusion if I can define the line as or through not just anything, but through a succession of points. However, succession then, there is an undefinable unless I can define it [with] a succession. But at that moment, I could define succession provided that I discern other Undefinables, other Identicals. I can judge that in a domain under consideration, I indeed say that the expression I am using in a domain under consideration remains entirely devoid of sense for the moment; I use it nominally in order to try to clarify things somewhat. So I would say that there are geometric Undefinables, that I call notions of primary class. [Pause] Let’s add, randomly: point, contiguity, distance – perhaps these are notions, but little matter what notions I add – unity. Perhaps these are undefinable notions, let us assume. See, I have my list; we are going to borrow from Leibniz’s list through which he creates his Combinatory, and [it’s] the sole example we have of a Combinatory developed precisely about geometry in which there are, I don’t know, I no longer recall very well, 25 or 30 undefinable notions as starting point. These are notions of class 1.
Notions of class 2: quantity, for example. Is quantity an Undefinable or not? All that… Once again, that changes nothing because you can choose. You can always say, for me, no, in my axiomatic, in my Combinatory, I am going to define quantity; this is possible. At that point, you will do so with notions that themselves are not definable to infinity. You will really have to stop because you only attain notions that only include themselves, for example, for numbers, One. One only includes itself. One, I would say, is the Identical for numbers; it’s the auto-inclusion. But from that point on, after One come reciprocal inclusions. And in fact, notions of class 2 in the Combinatory are obtained by combining two notions from class 1. Here, with class 2, there will be reciprocal inclusions.
Notions of class 3 will be obtained – here, if you have understood this, you will really be dazzled; you are going see the extent to which this is going to create a lovely Combinatory – the notions of class 3 will be obtained either by combining three notions from class 1 or by combining a notion from class 1 and a notion from class 2. [Pause] So there you have all of it.
Let’s go back to the Undefinables. If we return to the Undefinables, what are Undefinables in auto-inclusion? Leibniz gives them a name. As we will need this name, they are simple primitive notions, simple primitive notions, that is, these are the originary concepts, the foundations of everything, or the roots of everything, or the source of everything, he says. [Pause] I am saying this because, understand, in this as well, if you understand it, you will understand a bit of everything. We are no longer, we are no longer at all… Please understand… In philosophy, when it’s not the philosophy of the great philosophers, we don’t hear about the principle of identity. But that’s not what the principle of identity is. A is A, we are told A is A, but see here, one must not say the principle of identity; one must say the Identicals. The principle of identity is immediately plural, in any case, for Leibniz, since identity is the characteristic of auto-inclusion, and so what is auto-inclusion? It’s the characteristic of a term that includes only itself. So there will be as many Identicals as there are terms in auto-inclusion. One must not say the principle of identity; one must say the Identicals. The Identicals are the notions of class 1, that is, the simple primitive notions. You will say to me, what if there were no Identicals? Ah ha, hee hee, yes, [Laughter] if there were no Identicals. Well then, there are some, and why are there any? I am going to tell you why, I will tell you, but we must wait a bit because we can continue to contemplate the Identicals some more. When one does not know, it’s very odd, these things, the Identicals, source of everything, at the basis of God’s understanding. At the basis of God’s understanding, one does not find the principle of identity. Otherwise, we would understand nothing at all about Leibniz’s beautiful expression, “God calculates the world” … The world, what more is there? The world, mondus in Latin, he tells us, mondus fit, that is, the world happens, the world creates the event. He doesn’t say that the world is an attribute of God. That would be Spinoza, and he doesn’t want anything from Spinoza; he wants the world to be an event.
So good, let’s get back to the Identicals, the Identical at the basis of God’s understanding. At the basis of God’s understanding, the Identicals in auto-inclusion roar. And what is that? What relationship is there between two Identicals? Precisely none, none at all. Why? Because relations begin there when Identicals are combined. In other words, relations begin with reciprocal inclusion, with definitions. But Identicals, with each including only itself, an Identical has no relation with another Identical, which Leibniz expresses by saying in a number of very, very special texts, because he had to find a word: they are disparate, absolutely disparate. In other words, one of them contains nothing that another contains. This is even the definition of the Undefinable. If one of them contained something that another contained, it could be defined. But precisely because each one only contains itself, they cannot even contradict one another. They are absolutely disparate. They can neither be contrary nor contradictory. They cannot exclude each other; each one only contains itself… [Interruption of the recording] [1:33:10]
 
Part 3
… The individual notion is the term, the Leibnizian term. But at the other end of the chain, there are simple primitive notions, and you recall that individual notions are without doors or windows, that is, they tend toward including (sont incluantes). Nothing reaches them from outside. To Caesar, some things reach him from outside, but to Caesar’s notion, nothing reaches from outside since everything is predicable on the notion. And yes indeed, see, how that occurs. Simple primitive notions have no relation with one another because each includes only itself and contains only itself. So they are closed off from each other. The individual notions at the other end [of the chain] include the entire world; each of them includes the world. They include everyone, the entire world, but precisely because the entire world only exists within each of them. They are also without relations with one another. They have neither doors nor windows, I mean, for two opposite reasons at both ends of the chain. The primitive notions and the individual notions create an echo exactly like, from the start, I suggested to you this arithmetic echo, infinity over 1 and 1 over infinity.
Oh but let us continue. These are the disparates. Henceforth, the Identicals or simple notions, the absolutely simple notions, the Identicals, well they cannot be incompatible with one another. Being absolutely disparate, they are necessarily compatible. Why? They couldn’t be contradictory, they could only be contrary or contradictory if we could reduce one of them to a notion that would be affirmed by one and excluded by the other. So, in order to be contradictory, it would be necessary that this not be a primitive notion. Including only itself, the Disparates are necessarily compatible. Having nothing to do with each other, they are necessarily compatible.
So see, about the definition… But then the final point, completely essential: why go all the way to the Undefinables? Here as well, it’s a long philosophical tradition: why go all the way to the Undefinables? Well, [Pause] these Undefinables, up to that point in philosophy they had a name. It was “ultimate predicates”, predicates beyond which one can go back not farther, and this is what in philosophy since Aristotle was called categories. In fact, in Aristotle, what is a category? Categories are terms without links, terms without links, that is, Disparates. We can say of them that they’re terms such that everything that exists is one or the other; everything that exists is one or the other, of these primary terms. Everything that exists, if you will, falls under one or the other of these organizing headings, these categorical headings. Or else we can say – and this will indeed be the definition given by Kant later – that these are predicates of every object; these are predicates of any object whatsoever (de l’objet quelconque). Being green is a predicate. When I say the tree is green, it’s a predicate.
But, but, but, but every object is not green, whereas when I say substance, causality, quality, quantity – every object is substance, that is, being something permanent that undergoes variations. Every object is substance. Every object has qualities; every object has a quantity; every object has a locus; every object is within time, etc. Predicates of the object whatsoever, in opposition to predicates of the determined object, predicates of the object whatsoever are categories. These are terms without links to one another. They are pure Disparates. Aristotle gave the list of categories, precisely in the treatise Of categories. That began with substance, quantity, quality, etc. There weren’t many of them. These were Undefinables. [Pause]
So is this the same thing? Are these the categories that Leibniz calls simple primitives, simple primitive notions? There’s a resemblance. And yet, something happened that dislodged everything. Why is this a necessity? Why don’t we go all the way to infinity in the definitions? How can we understand this? What has happened since Aristotle? Well, what happened is always connected to Christianity, the proof of the infinite. What are the Disparates, the simple primitive notions for Leibniz? I have a sense that it’s this, quite simple to see: if something… To understand any notion whatsoever, whether or not it’s a simple primitive notion, a proof is requires. What is it that is going to transform the problem of categories within Christianity? It’s precisely the proofs of the infinite, specifically simple notions, I think, which are forms directly able to be raised to infinity. It’s the new definition, or the new determination. Aristotle himself wanted to seek out expressions without links, without links to each other, Disparates.
But everything occurs as if the idea of an infinite God changes the problem, it seems to me. The Disparates, the primary notions, are notions directly able to be raised to infinity. I say, directly able to be raised; all that complicates matter, indeed because, well, let’s assume that there are all sorts of infinite. There are lots of kinds of infinite. Look at the famous letter by Spinoza on infinity, a letter about which Leibniz said that it’s almost the best text by Spinoza and that one had to accept everything in it. Spinoza distinguished examples of the infinite: the infinite by itself, the infinite by its cause, the infinite because it was beyond all number, etc. There are all sorts of orders of the infinite.
Moreover, yet again, for the seventeenth century, there is no indefinite, and if there is no indefinite, it’s simply because there is a whole series of orders of the infinite. So good, there are things… Whatever might be… You take a notion; it’s a proof, and you ask, is it able directly – that is, by itself – to be raised to infinity? You say, the world. I can conceive of the world as an infinite series, an infinite series of events. Ah yes, but it is able to be raised to infinity, but – don’t concern yourself with whether it’s infinite or not; concern yourself with the notion, uniquely with the notion – so you tell yourself, the notion of the world, can I think of it as infinity without contradiction? You don’t ask yourself what occurs, in fact; can I think of it as infinity without contradiction? Ah yes, but I can do so only through the order of causes, that is, this will be an infinite by its cause. Then, fine, yes, being… So good, if it’s that, it’s not a primary notion. I will call primary notion any notion that I cannot think of it, solely through thinking, that I cannot conceive of as directly infinite, that is, directly able to be raised to infinity.
Another example : white. Can I suggest an infinite white, something infinitely white? Well, perhaps not, but why? Because what would that be? In the end, something resists this, but I tell myself it really matters little. This very example is taken up by Leibniz in the New Essays [on Human Understanding], which is why I… Perhaps there is no greater degree [of white]. Is this a degree? Ah, what is the relation… Finally in all this, it’s a color, an infinite color, [but] maybe not. If I manage, in fact, to show that in the notion of color itself, there is a mark of finitude, that is, the reference of vibrations, oscillations to the sensory organs of a living being, I cannot think of a color as infinite, and that’s marked by the finitude of a sensory reception (une réception sensible).
But then what does the color imply? You see that the primary notion is working; it implies extension (l’étendue). Can I speak of an infinite extension? Well, Descartes talked about it, and as if by chance, he considered infinity, euh, extension as a substance. Can I speak of an infinite extension? Fine, but of what order of the infinite? If I can think without contradiction of a directly infinite extension, very good. It’s a simple notion. Leibniz will show… That is, it’s an Identical. Leibniz will show, [it’s] nothing of the sort, that Descartes did not at all understand the problem of Identicals and that extension cannot be thought of as able to be directly raised to the infinite. Something else would be required. Fine, but let’s suggest… Consider the direction of this line of thought. So, I continue.
Understanding, will: are these simple primitive notions? Can I think without contradiction of an infinite understanding, and what would that be? When I say, for example, God has an infinite understanding, an infinite will, this is the proof of the infinite that allows me to define, to determine the Undefinables such that I can now say – understand my focus — but if there are Undedinables, it’s not at all simply because one must stop. To a great extent, that would be the Aristotelian argument. Aristotle’s piercing argument is that one must indeed stop. There’s a moment when one must stop. He says it in Greek, it’s quite beautiful. One has to… can it… As it’s been attributed to him, might this be a cry of hope? In Greek, it’s really lovely, anagkê stênaï, anagkê stênaï, there’s a moment for stopping.[6] Leibniz isn’t this kind of person, you understand? [Laughter] — That’s something that has never been created, the history of philosophical temperaments. — Reason for him [Leibniz] is that one must never stop. The cry of reason is that one must never stop, and in Aristotle, it’s rather one must indeed stop. No, one must never stop. And so why does Leibniz posit the Undefinables? [It’s] not at all because one must stop, but because one must never stop. Very strange.
The Undefinables are simply infinite forms, infinite forms that are the primaries, the Identicals. They are directly linked to the infinite. You see, there’s a fundamental relation, the Identicals and the infinite. Why? Because the Identicals are forms able to be raised to infinity. But if I say that, then there are things one can no longer say. [Pause] What does Leibniz do regarding the principle of identity? It’s not a question of saying that this is a philosophy demanding the principle of identity. He makes the principle of identity undergo the strangest operations that exist, also the most admirable and the most bizarre. He pluralizes it and he infinitizes it (l’infinise) … Yes? Why not? Yes, please oblige me, since he pluralizes it and he infinitizes it (l’infinitise). [Laughter] So that’s what I said? Both at the same time, that is, all forms will be identical, whatever they are, [and] they go on to infinity. And why does he do that? Well, if we don’t understand this, we no longer understand at all.
I am going to tell a story of something that happened later. Long afterward, the Kantians who reacted strongly against Leibniz said this: Leibniz reduces judgment to the principle of identity. There you have it. But this operation is not possible, and what the Kantians said was admirable, very, very beautiful; it came down to this: the principle of identity is only hypothetical. If A is, then A is A. This cannot be expressed otherwise. If A is, then A is A. Eh? But then, it cannot give us any… As the Kantians say in their language, the principle of identity cannot give us any categorical truth. It will only give us a hypothetical truth. If there is A, then A is A. Hence [we see] the Kantians’s stroke of genius to say [that] the principle of identity cannot be treated as apodictic, as categorical. Eh? –  Moreover apodictic means necessary. – It isn’t necessary; it’s conditional. If there is A, then A is A, such that the only categorical and apodictic truth, the only necessary truth, is what? It’s something that is deeper than the principle of identity, which is what? But if A is, A is any representation at all. If there is a representation, if I represent A, A is A. What else is there other than representations? There’s the moi [self, ego] that thinks of the representation.
In other words, the principle of identity goes beyond toward something else, which is what? Moi = moi, the auto-position of the moi. [Pause] And moi = moi is irreducible to the simple principle of identity which is always hypothetical. It’s truly the moi that posits itself, the auto-position of the finite moi insofar as the finite moi accompanies any representation. Thus, it’s the synthesis of the finite moi, moi = moi, it’s the synthesis of the finite moi that encounters the principle of identity. The principle of identity is not primary, you see? And this is the great reaction against Leibniz. The principle of identity is incapable of posing itself by itself; only the moi is [in] auto-position. You see that in this regard, Kantianism expresses, in fact, a moment in philosophy in which they no longer believe in the concept of infinity. Henceforth, the foundation must be sought alongside the finite moi. Well then, what did Leibniz do? This is it, the Kantians yet again, Kant and the Kantians, they have something quite different to do than our own much more modest task. The task that we have taken on this year is to understand Leibniz. The Kantians have something else to do; they have to say what they have to say. So we mustn’t wonder if they have understood Leibniz well or not. But we can tell ourselves [that] to some extent, Leibniz was already sensitive to this problem, and what I can say about the question of Leibniz would be: under what condition can one attain an auto-position of the principle of identity? And his answer is: by placing the infinite into identity; by placing the infinite into identity. So identity is truly auto-position. In what form? In the form of the Identicals that include nothing else, each one including nothing other than itself. [Pause]
A quick pre-thesis: I am saying that Leibniz is going to derive from this a new proof or rather a formulation of the proof of God’s existence. Here, then, I am going rather quickly; I am relating all that you need. I believe I’ve already said it, but I am resituating this because it will become clearer: he reproached Descartes for having moved too quickly, to have proved God’s existence by simply saying: God is the infinitely perfect being, that is, understand, I conceive it as the infinitely perfect being, God thought of as the infinitely perfect being. Well, if such a being didn’t exist, if such a being that I conceive of didn’t exist, this would be contradictory since it would lack perfection. So I could conceive of an even more perfect being, one that not only would be conceived of as infinitely perfect, but moreover one that would exist. So it would be contradictory to deny God’s existence.
Fine. Leibniz answers: this proof is fine, it’s quite fine, but it moved forward too quickly because Descartes didn’t do, didn’t show whether the concept of an infinitely perfect being were possible. What does he tell us? That the conception of an infinitely perfect being is not contradictory, to which Leibniz says, yes, Descartes is correct, that is, God exists, yes, if it is possible. The greatest speed or an infinite speed is contradictory. Perhaps the most perfect being, the sovereignly perfect being is also contradictory. Perhaps. So one has to show that God is possible. Descartes wasn’t able to do so. Look at what he has in mind. Spinoza will say exactly on this point [that] it will be… Spinoza and Leibniz are in complete agreement, and both are going to do the same thing, the same operation: how to show that God is possible? If it [God] is possible, it exists, but one had to show that this was possible. And how does one go about showing this? Well, it’s [by saying]: God is surely physically simple, but it is not logically simple. You know what [Leibniz] reproaches Descartes for; it’s through this that Leibniz founds modern logic. What he reproaches Descartes for is to have confused two decompositions, the decomposition into parts, and the decomposition into notions. Descartes believed that when something wasn’t decomposed into parts, it was simple, simple, by itself. No. Something might not be decomposed into parts and yet could be decomposed into notions. And the Simple is that it’s there not only to be decomposed into parts, but [also] into notions. For example, extension can be, or not be, decomposed into parts, it can only be after; one could say that prior to its own parts, it remains decomposable into notions. Thus the notion of Simple is in relation to the notion, not in relation to the part.
But for them, Spinoza as much as Leibniz, they can think that they have proved the possibility of God. Why? Because God is the aggregate of forms, the aggregate of forms that one can think of directly as infinite, the aggregate of forms that one can think as infinite by themselves. You will tell me, but I have no idea about such forms. That doesn’t matter; it has no importance. God has it, the idea. Or else you say, the idea of an infinite form by itself makes no sense, so that’s quite alright. You are already like the Kantians. Or else you grant a sense to the idea of infinite form by itself; there are infinite forms by themselves. Fine, these are the elements of God; these are the constitutive forms of God.
What are these forms? For Leibniz, there are some that exist. What then are these forms? As we saw, these are simple primitive notions. Each one includes only itself; these are forms in which the content for each is only itself. They are absolutely disparate. In this, there is a completely twisted reasoning, very, very appealing, very amusing. Each of God’s constitutive forms only includes itself. Each is absolutely disparate from all the others. Henceforth, each includes only itself. Henceforth, they cannot be incompatible. There is a tiny, three-page text by Leibniz in Latin, a Latin text, entitled “That the sovereignly perfect being exists”, and he wants to show that God is possible. He says, “The primary elements are forms able to be directly raised to the infinite,” that is, in this through themselves as infinite. “They are necessarily compatible,” since absolute disparate. They cannot be contrary to each other (se contrarier) nor contradict each other. So they can be in a same subject; they can be in a same subject; they can be included in a same subject.
In other words, the proof of God’s existence – this is what I was telling you at our last meeting, but I hope that here it’s even clearer – goes from the aggregate of all possibilities, that is simple notions, the forms able to be raised to the infinite, it goes from the aggregate of all possibilities to the individual existence of a being that we will call God. This is the formula infinity over 1. It’s the possibility of primitive forms that guarantee God’s possibility; henceforth, God exists. We go from the aggregate of primitive forms, from simple primitive notions, to the singular existence of a God. Fine, this is what it is to place the infinite into identity. The day that one can no longer place the infinite into identity, Kantian philosophy will be born, that is, the foundation that we can no longer seek other than alongside the finite moi, and then we’ll pass on to something else, we’ll pass on to something else. Fine, generally speaking, we can say that.
So if you’ve understood that, I have almost completed this long and vexing passage. But for us, we know that there are infinite forms that are the very possibility of God. What is important in what I’ve just said is this passage, from the aggregate of all possibilities to the singular existence of a God, of which all the possible forms are the elements. We pass from the infinite in identity; this is creating this passage of infinity over 1. All this is a large morsel, from all of Leibniz’s texts that are being considered today. These are not the most enjoyable, but this is necessary.
So for us, our situation is: this is all fine, but the fact is that we are not familiar with these forms, and Leibniz will say it several times, well then, we don’t get there. One can always create the logic of these forms, but knowing what they are, how do we do that? So here we are requiring a replacement solution since we do not have an infinite understanding, and the replacement solution, for the Combinatory that we can never push all the way to the end, is what Leibniz calls the Characteristic. On the other hand, we can only manage a variable Characteristic according to the domains under consideration… [Interruption of the recording] [2:05:00]
 
Part 4
… I am saying very, very quickly… — I apologize here for this session, but this is a great relief to have all this done. — I am telling you now, fine, place yourself in a concrete situation. Our understanding is a finite understanding. We can be certain that there are entirely compatible infinite forms, entirely disparate that are constitutives of God. But at the extreme, we cannot even know what these are, these forms. So, how do we manage to proceed? Fortunately, we have the Characteristic there since if the Combinatory has as its ideal project to direct itself toward simple notions, that is, another name that Leibniz gives them, the primary Possibles, you see, the primary Possibles in God’s understanding, well then, how do we ourselves manage? I believe that here, there is a very important method. [Leibniz] says in general – here I am trying to speak as concretely as possible – he tells us, you know, in the end you find yourself faced with domains that you manage to divide up for reasons of perception, understanding, and at the extreme, domains that you begin to define uniquely in a nominal manner. You say, the living exists – I am taking an example – the living exists. The living is a domain. And then, there is the inanimate. There’s the inanimate and there’s the living. You say, there’s continuous quantity and there’s discontinuous quantity. So you can nominally define some domains. These domains are populated with objects. So you see, you start from a certain complex group, I would say, a complex group that you can define nominally, a milieu, a domain populated with a type of object. There are loads of these. You say, well, the visible. The visible is a domain populated by colors. Life is a domain populated by organisms. So then this goes on to infinity. Discontinuous quantity is a domain of quantities populated by numbers. See, you can define all that nominally. That commits you to nothing.
And Leibniz tells us, what is our personal task? Given a domain, populated with objects, one must define the requisites of the domain, that is, pass from the nominal definition to the real definition. [It’s a] very odd notion in Leibniz, the notion of requisite. What is this requisite? It’s precisely that which is required by; it’s the condition of the domain and the objects that populate it. [Pause] What are the requisites of a domain and its objects? These are relatively simple elements, there. These are not the absolutely simple [ones]; these are the relatively Simple about which he will say that they symbolize with the absolutely Simple. They are relatively simple since they are simple relative to the domain of objects being considered. From which [we have] Leibniz’s strength against Descartes; when he says, Descartes believed simplicity to be defined in relation to parts, the Simple is what wouldn’t have any parts, whereas simplicity is defined in relation to notions. The Simple is the requisite of a domain, that is, the requisite is the notion implicated by a domain insofar as it is populated by objects.
I come back to my examples. [For] discontinuous quantity populated by the number, what is the requisite? Primary numbers. See the sense in which it’s a requisite: it’s with primary numbers that you will be able to engender any number. See, the requisite is – if you have followed [this], if you recall our work in the preceding trimester – I was saying that it’s very similar to point of view. This is what allows us to arrange (ordonner) the cases in a domain. For example, the arithmetic triangle in which, at the extreme, you can engender all numbers starting from primary numbers. Fine, if you engender all numbers starting from primary numbers, you have passed into the real definition, that is, you have reached the relatively Simple [ones] that are absolutely sufficient in relation to a particular domain.
[For] the visible insofar as [it’s] populated by colors, you have primitive colors. You are going to create primitive colors. There is an outline of all the theories of colors in Leibniz. The living and its domain, rather the domain of the living, is the object that is the organism. You compare it with the domain of the inorganic. What is the requisite? That depends on physics. You see, it’s a relative requisite, it’s a relative Simple. What are we to say? Here, I am deliberately not touching on Leibniz’s theories of physics; I am extracting a simple [element]. The reason is that if you consider the physical milieu as populated by bodies in movement, what is the requisite? The requisite is that the speed of a movement is lost and is gained progressively. He states this against Descartes for whom speed is instantaneous. So he [Leibniz] has already shown that something believed by Descartes as simple, in fact, is not simple, not simple from the viewpoint of notions. The whole domain of physics implies the acquisition and the gradual loss of speed in movement.
How do we take account of this? [It’s] through the summation, the summation of – how to say this in the simplest way? – of small quantities of movement that will compose speed and that Leibniz calls conatus, solicitations of movement. There will be a summation of conatus, the conatus being relatively simple elements, and relatively simple elements of speed. By reaching the conatus that, in fact, are differentials – what is occurring is already decimal infinite calculus – by reaching the conatus, I reach the requisite of inorganic movement, that is, the summation of tiny homogeneous parts. By tiny parts, one must understand parts smaller than any given part. You see, I will have my requisite, the requisite taking account of the milieu and the objects that populate it.
I pass on to the living. What is the requisite of an organism? Well, to create an organism, the requisite of the inanimate body does not suffice, that is, the summation of conatus does not suffice. The summation of tiny homogeneous parts does not suffice. The summation of conatus does not suffice. It matters little, but why? Here I am summarizing enormously. Leibniz will invoke a new kind of force. The summation of conatus, in the inanimate domain, is what he calls – that is, the requisites of physics – it’s what Leibniz calls elastic forces. He creates a very beautiful physics from elasticity. As we saw, this was very, very precious for our idea of inflection. These are elastic forces.
For the living, for the organism, it’s a matter of something else. Elastic forces are not sufficient for creating an organism. What is required? Required are forces that Leibniz calls — at least in one text, but an important text – plastic forces. And plastic forces are not defined by the summation of infinitely tiny parts that would be the conatus. Plastic forces are defined by placing homologous parts into correspondence. See: elastic forces – summation of tiny homogeneous parts; plastic forces – tiny homologous parts in correspondence. These [terms] matter little; you will look up what all this means in your dictionary, homologous, homogeneous; that will give you some practical exercises and it will be very interesting.
I would say that plastic forces are the requisites of the living milieu and of the organisms that populate it. Elastic forces are the requisites of the physical milieu and of the inorganic bodies that move there. Primary numbers are the requisites of discontinuous quantity, etc., etc. Primitive colors are the requisite of the visible. Each time, in any domain, and recall what I was telling you about point of view: if it’s true that point of view is precisely the requisite under which cases of a domain are arranged, the Characteristic is precisely the determination of requisites in a domain being considered and in relation to the objects that populate this domain… [Interruption of the recording] [2:18:17]
We dispose of relatively simple notions that symbolize with absolutely simple notions, with the primary Possibles. And understand what that means: one must not – I take this as a huge misunderstanding to say this – eh well, yes, there’s still an inclusion there because the requisites are included in what results from it, specifically the milieu and objects, a particular milieu and a particular domain of object. For it’s the reverse: these are requisites that are including, it’s the requisites that are like fertilizer or seeds that contain the domain that is developed starting from them and objects that are unfolded starting from them, such that when 2 and 2 are 4, where is the inclusion? Well, in 2 and 2 are 4, the inclusion is obvious, but it’s not at all what you think. It’s not 4 that is in 2 and 2; it’s not “2 and 2” that is in 4; it’s “2 and 2 are 4” that is included in the requisites, that is, in the primary factors, in the primary numbers intervening into 2, 3, and 4, following the linkage of definitions that we had earlier. The inclusion is the inclusion of that which is composed [du composé] in the requisites. The requisites are seeds in which the complex domain and its objects are included, such that I would say [that] the requisite is the notion of the thing. You see here, I am falling back precisely… All that ought to be utterly dazzling because I would say [that] the domain is the same thing as inflection, the event. Any domain is an event. One must manage to think of the domain as event, that occurs.
So here’s what there is. The fact is… So the domain is an event, fine. The objects that populate the domain are the things to which the event happens. [Pause] So then, the event that happens to the thing is included in the concept of the thing. What does that mean? What is the concept of the thing? It’s not the thing. The concept of the thing is the aggregate of requisites. It’s not the requisites that are included in the thing. It’s the thing and what happens to it that are included in the requisites of the thing such that a Combinatory of primitive colors is necessary; moreover, Leibniz goes quite far here because he says that in this, obviously, it’s uniquely a function of our senses that we speak of primitive colors. We say that green is a mixture, but yellow and blue are obviously mixtures as well. Why? [It’s] always for the same reason: there is no infinite yellow, no infinite blue. So these are already complex notions, all this, [but] our senses simply are such that we grasp the mixture for green, but we don’t grasp it for yellow and blue. But a Combinatory is colors… So, at least the finitude of our senses is useful for us, that is, it allows us to define relative requisites. But understand well, these requisites are really seeds, seeds of a domain and its objects.
And inclusion here… But then, I am getting toward the end, where I had hoped to arrive. It’s that… [Pause] It’s a third case of inclusion. I grasp it, my third case of inclusion. This is what I would like you to understand. The misunderstanding to avoid [is] to say, well yes, I understood; in the judgment of the senses 2 and 2 are 4, 4 is contained in 2 and 2; or else, “2 and 2” is contained in 4. These would be two misunderstandings, two misunderstandings. Yet again, it’s not that; it’s “2 and 2 are 4” that is contained in the requisites of “2 and 2 are 4”, and the requisites of “2 and 2 are 4” is the decomposition into primary factors given in the three definitions, such that the inclusion is never where you think it is. But when I operate through relatively simples, through requisites, what am I faced with? I am faced with what I could literally call a non-reciprocal inclusion, a non-reciprocal inclusion, of the part-whole kind. [Pause] Every… — I must not get this wrong; I am saying every… Wait, every… “Every duodenary is…” What do I mean? “Every duodenary,” that is, every number divisible by 12…. I must not lose my place in this… I want to be so clever, but I had better refer to the text. It would be catastrophic if I made a mistake. Alas, everything is getting all mixed up in my head… I can’t find my text; everything is going badly… On Freedom; there, On Freedom! Aie aie aie aie aie aie aie… There we are.
“Every duodenary number is a senary”, right? That is, every number divisible by 12 is divisible by 6. I am saying that there is an inclusion – you already get this, it’s in the air (rien qu’au flair) – there is a non-reciprocal inclusion here because every senary number is not a duodenary. Every number divisible by 12… How [does] he demonstrate this? Listen well: “For every duodenary is bino-binary ternary.” [Laughter] You’re laughing, but it’s what one does in formal logic, right? We never stop… That comes from Leibniz, all this, whereas myself, I no longer understand anything… Oh yes, “every duodenary is bino-binary ternary.” [Laughter] Why? Why? [It’s] by virtue of a definition. In fact, it’s by virtue of the decomposition into primary numbers, specifically 12 equals – in primary numbers – so a definition for 12: 2 x 2 x 3, 2 bino, 2 binary, 3 ternary. Ooooooh. [Deleuze breaths out, relieved. Laughter] “Every duodenary is bino-binary-ternary”, by definition, since 12 equals 2 x 2 x 3. That’s a definition, that is, a reciprocal inclusion, “and every binary ternary,” 2 multiplied by 3, “is senary”. That works; it’s the definition of 6, through primary factors, 2 multiplied [by 3], you see? I am operating on the level of requisites.
But I haven’t yet demonstrated that every duodenary is senary. One must have something special, eh? I will reread to you the whole of the text. I come upon “every bino-binary is binary.” [Pause] I have to introduce… I have two definitions, but between the two, I have something irreducible with the definitions, specifically – which nonetheless is typically an inclusion – “every bino-binary ternary is binary ternary,” that is, 2 multiplied by 3 is included in 2 multiplied by 2 multiplied by 3. You will tell me that this goes without saying, but no. That goes without saying, ok, that goes without saying provided that you give me another kind of inclusion, a new genre of inclusion, non-reciprocal inclusions. When you start off from requisites, you are necessarily going to encounter non-reciprocal inclusions that will allow you to establish linkages between reciprocal inclusions. If you are following me, we are saved, absolutely saved. [Laughter] Everything is explained.
You remember? I had started off from this text, On Freedom, that concerned me. Why did he say that in truths of essence, there is a case of truth in which the inclusion is only virtual? He is going to tell us – and this isn’t regarding truths of existence, but indeed mathematical truths, truths of essence – he tells us: there are cases in which one has to “extract an inclusion so that what was virtual (latent) in the proposition and contained under [in] a certain power becomes evident (se trouve rendu) through the obvious and expressed [explicit] demonstration,”[7] for example, this whole story of the duodenary. It’s when we operate not with the absolute Simples that escape us, but with the relatively Simples, [that] there is irreversibility and not reversibility, of the requisite to the domain. In other words, you are going to operate with, not only, with non-reciprocal inclusions. And this is the case, whereas the linkage of definitions can only give you reciprocal inclusions. Intervening here, with the method of requisites, [are] non-reciprocal inclusions that are going to justify the second case. It’s this that ought to be marvelous for us.
In the end, what are these requisites? I am going to tell you in all domains. But I believe that we will need the requisite, the definition later: it’s the degree of unity, the degree and type of unity that a domain and its objects suppose. And there is non-reciprocal inclusion of the domain and its objects in the requisites. Henceforth, henceforth I would say that the truths of essence propose to us three types of inclusion.[8] Here are the three types of inclusion:
The first type, and that will be our focus today: the auto-inclusions, specifically the Identicals, otherwise called disparates, otherwise called simple primitive notions, otherwise called primary Possible. Second point: the reciprocal inclusions, otherwise called definitions. [Pause] Third, the requisites or non-reciprocal inclusions.
All these three types of inclusion concerning truths of essence have as common characteristic the ability to be developed – except obviously the first ones, the Identicals; they are not to be developed. They are all developed in this sense, but they are developable in the milieu in which they would constitute God – they are developable and, I would say, they are assignable. They can be developed. These are eminently unfoldable, developable inclusions. When I assign a requisite, I develop an inclusion; I am developing a non-reciprocal inclusion. There you are.
The truths of existence, then, Caesar crossing the Rubicon, what is that going to be? Here as well, there is going to be inclusion in the notion. This time, what is the requisite going to be since there is always inclusion in the requisite? It’s going to be the individual notion. What is the individual notion? See? There is going to be a faceoff of these simple primitive notions, the primary Possible, or the Representor [Représentant], that is, the requisites. It goes alongside the individual notions that are themselves requisites, but requisites of truths of existence. What is an individual notion? This time, there is indeed inclusion of the event and of the thing in the notion. The thing is that which happens to it, [and] what’s included in the individual notion, that is, in the requisite, fine. [Pause]
So, simply, I would say that the inclusion is not developable. God itself, the text On Freedom tells us, only sees the envelopment. God itself sees only the envelopment. What does that mean? But that means, in fact, that in a certain way this is what we have been saying from the start: the fold goes on to infinity. Envelopment will go on to infinity, agreed, but we saw this from the start. It’s also true of truths of essence. There is only the infinite everywhere. So that is not sufficient.
At the extreme, I was saying that with truths of existence, there begins another type of inclusion, a fourth type of inclusion, in which this time, the inclusion is not even localizable. The reciprocal inclusion… Oh, sorry, the non-reciprocal inclusions were perfectly localizable. The non-reciprocal inclusions were transmitted along the demonstrative chain. The non-reciprocal inclusions were localized, localizable. Every bino-binary is binary. But here, we are going to enter into a domain of non-localizable inclusion. What is this going to be?
Good, here we are; I’d like to finish on this because you need to reflect on this for the next meeting. In the Letters from Arnauld, [there are] two strange topics, Arnauld being a figure from Port-Royal who had a great correspondence with Leibniz. Two topics, Leibniz mixes together two very odd topics. He jumps at the same time from one to the other and drives Arnauld mad. Arnauld doesn’t know where he’s going. [Leibniz] tells us, here’s God – I wants to show that God is not responsible for evil. He tells us, God didn’t create Adam as sinner. That’s his first great expression, God didn’t great Adam as sinner, but he created the world in which Adam sinned. God didn’t create Adam as sinner, but he created the world in which Adam sinned. Second proposition: the world doesn’t exist outside the individual notions that express it, Adam, Caesar, Alexander, you, me. Here’s the first proposition: God didn’t create a particular individual notion; he created the world in which there is a particular individual notion. Second proposition: the world doesn’t exist outside the individual notions that express it. All this makes one dizzy if you try to… One feels that this is not in contradiction, in fact. God created the world, but not the individual notions, well yes, but take care. Hardly have we understood this than Leibniz says, yes but be careful: the world doesn’t exist outside the individual notions, which means what? Perhaps we could understand thanks to our work during the first trimester.
God begins through inflection. It creates the series of inflection called the world. In fact, it creates the world. It creates the world in which “Adam sinned”; it’s a series of events, of pure events, sin, salvation, death, life, etc. It creates the world. [Pause] Only, in this, from inflection to inclusion, the world that God creates exists only as folded into individual notions. Each notion expresses the world. It doesn’t exist outside individual notions. God does not create Adam, Caesar, etc.; it creates the world in which there is Adam, Caesar. But this world doesn’t exist other than folded into the notion of Adam, the notion of Caesar, etc. So, in fact, this is non-foldable inclusion, you see? It creates the world, but it creates it within individual notions. And if I say, ah God, you created Adam as sinner, you made a whole lot of trouble for all of us, God responds no, I didn’t create Adam as sinner; I created the world in which there is sin, and this world only exists within individual notions, that is, I folded it into Adam.
So, this is, this is a really strange thing that it [God] says, that is, [that] this world is not foldable; it cannot move away from individual notions. But nonetheless, yes, then by what right does one speak of this world? [There’s] a final point to correct: yes, in fact, we can unfold it, but ideally, ideally. Outside individual notions that express it, the world only has an ideal existence. [Pause] God creates the world in which Adam sinned, but careful, this world only exists folded into Adam and into other individual notions. So this is amazing. When Leibniz is attacked on this point, he [Deleuze makes a dodging motion; laughter in the room]; when he is attacked on the other point, he doesn’t answer. He is told, come on, this world is still in Adam; he answers, it’s possible, but what interests God is this world. It’s the world that God created, that’s all. But they say, fine, this world included sin… But careful, it’s only folded within Adam, enveloped within Adam. That’s what I mean by a non-localizable inclusion.
So, he is going to leave with the impression that there, he is leading… that he is too clever. Suddenly, we have to take him on a single point… Fine, there is in itself a large difference with truths of essence. It’s that Adam as non-sinner was possible, whereas 2 and 2 are not 4 is not possible. This is what you can always realize, but you cannot conceive that 2 and 2 do not make 4. On the other hand, we can grant this then, and we have to say, fine, Adam not sinning, what is that, another world? What is it? What does that mean? And what is an individual notion? God does not create the individual notions, but it creates the world in which there are individual notions. And on the other hand, this world itself does not exist outside individual notions. So good, fine, what are individual notions? Why is the opposite of an individual notion possible?
And here there is going to emerge the most beautiful of his concepts, the concept of incompossibility, and that we will see at the next class, to wit, Adam as non-sinner is possible, only he is incompossible with our world, whereas 2 and 2 doesn’t make 4, that’s impossible. And is there an Adam as non-sinner? Yes, it’s possible, only it’s not compossible with this world. And he invents this very odd notion of compossibility, and it’s the task, I assume, of every reader of Leibniz, at all costs, to give consistency to the notion of compossible and incompossible. Adam as non-sinner is incompossible with our world. What could that mean? Alas, [although] Leibniz frequently uses the notion, to our disappointment one single time he tells us [that] the root of incompossibility escapes our understanding. [Laughter] This gets really strange because, on one hand, this is unacceptable, completely unacceptable. We want, we demand a root of incompossibility that consists in what? To show us how incompossibility is a relation with contradiction. And this is essential, even from the point of view of logic. At all costs, a logic is necessary, a logic that might be able to show that the incompossible and the contradictory are two completely different relations.
So we have to say that perhaps Leibniz, at the same time that he was telling us that the roots of incompossibility escape us, he was leaving us enough signs and possibilities to give to the notion of compossibility a more positive sense. From which we have our task: what does that mean, what does incompossibility mean, and what logical principle does it assume? What does it mean, Adam as non-sinner is not compossible with our world? [End of the session] [2:48:26]
 
Lecture 7, 20 January 1987, Principles and Freedom (2): Toward Incompossibility
Part 1
We’re going to start by going back into our earlier work, hence with a bit of summary, and then we’ll move forward. So a flashback: the more this advances, the more something astounds me that, at the beginning, I had not sufficiently noticed. It’s this famous text on monads which are without doors or windows, and these texts have always been considered, there are a lot of them, but notably this text Monadology, but there are a lot of them that return to this idea. Most of the other texts say: “without a hole”, “without doors nor windows, without a hole.” So what astounds me more and more, suddenly it seemed to me, in fact, that something hasn’t been noticed, I say this for myself also because it came to me abruptly. I have been familiar with this text for a very long time, but there is still something quite striking. When one reads it, one says: obviously, what does this refer to? It doesn’t refer to metaphysics; some treat it like it was a metaphysical proposition by Leibniz, an eminently paradoxical proposition: the monad is without doors or windows, that is, the subject is without doors or windows. But I am saying that here we should bolt upright, and each of us chastises ourselves for not having grasped it immediately: this refers to a very concrete kind of furnishing (aménagement).
And it’s our departure point, our working topic for the year, it’s the Baroque furnishing par excellence. A room without doors or windows! What makes this Baroque? You see that in this flashback, we started from the idea that the Baroque is a fold within fold, it’s the fold that extends to infinity, it’s a fold within fold.
Second determination, the Baroque is the room without doors or windows. I mean, what makes that, concretely, Baroque? I do understand that it’s an ideal, there always must be a tiny hole, a little opening, but we speak ideally. Consider Baroque architecture.[2] There is no need even to give examples because it’s the constant presence of the Baroque, in Guarini, in Borromini, in Bernini. So after all this, without doors or windows, what does that evoke for us? Of what is it obviously the ideal? I’d say, it’s the ideal at once of the cell, of the sacristy, of the chapel, of the theater, that is, all these sites where what is to be seen either focuses on the spirit (a monk’s cell) or is within the room (the theater). And when I say “monk”, “monk’s cell”, it’s not by chance since the monk is the monas, it’s the same word, monk and monad. But of course, neither the monk’s cell nor the profane theater anticipated the Baroque. Certainly. On the other hand, what anticipates the Baroque is the constitution as architectural ideal of the room without doors or windows. Concretely, what is the room without doors or windows? Concretely it’s a camera obscura.
The camera obscura did not anticipate the Baroque either, but the fact remains that in the Baroque age, the camera obscura takes on a determinant importance in all the arts. It’s a camera obscura in the detail of its mechanism that you will find, for example, in Sarah Kofman’s book, Camera obscura.[3] There’s an advantage; I’m citing this book because in its appendix, one finds an eighteenth-century text which describes in detail, very precious for us, an eighteenth-century description of the camera obscura. You see that it’s a little room in which the individual, for example the painter, is introduced, and he is going to receive light through a cylindrical opening from above. So there is indeed an opening, but this opening is regulated, or the light coming in through this opening is regulated by an interplay of tilting mirrors, and depending on the position that the painter wants to give to his painting in relation to the object models that are projected through the mirror, whether he wants a perpendicular or parallel or oblique position of the painting, there will be an entire play of angling of the mirrors. You also recognize the Leibnizian theme of the monad-mirror of the city, and here as well, it’s quite astonishing that the comparison hasn’t been made, the confrontation with the camera obscura, when he tells us: monad, mirror of the city. It’s precisely the camera obscura. And it’s essential that in the Baroque age, the camera obscura will be the object of systematic use for certain painters, for example, Caravaggio. [Pause]
Let’s continue. The camera obscura, the sacristy. There is a sacristy in Rome that, literally, contains only a miniscule entry. All the rest is a great Baroque technique, [that is] in trompe-l’oeil. The windows are in trompe-l’oeil, the ceiling is in trompe-l’oeil, etc. The use of trompe-l’oeil in the Baroque era causes us no problems since it’s precisely the monad without doors or windows. The chapel of the Shroud of Turin, how is it described, even in the tourist guides? I don’t know [that] it’s described like that, but it doesn’t matter; the chapel is notoriously described like this: it is completely in black marble. You recall the importance of marble in the Baroque era, since yet again, marble is veined. The chapel is entirely in black marble, it is very very dark, and it truly contains a minimum of openings, and still the ideal of these openings is that one sees nothing through them. Everything to be seen remains inside. But since it is dark, it’s almost not even what’s to be seen, but what’s to be read. You’ll tell me that to read, one needs light; ok, yes, one needs light, but purely as a physical condition. Reading is an operation of the mind, reading is a perception of the mind, it’s the Reading Room. And the monad reads the world much more than it sees it. We saw previously the whole passage from seeing to reading in Leibniz.
The interior without doors or windows is really… One of you was reading to me, about the Baroque, this monastic architectural theme of the cell without doors or windows, where this theme of the sacristy took off, and that it’s no doubt one of the Baroque contributions to architecture. One of you was reading to me something well-known from Le Corbusier, who analyzed it very well, the Abbey of La Tourette, near Lyon, where the chapel, he explained it quite well – if the reader is here, he can add something if he wants – the chapel, at the extreme, is without doors or windows. It’s the room that realizes, literally, quite literally, the formula: “an interior,” at the extreme, an interior without exterior. So, of course, there are openings, but openings so well bent, so oblique, in the work of Le Corbusier, that light passes through openings, but one sees nothing from the outside, with uniquely a light passing colored by elements from within, so much so that these openings themselves offer nothing to be seen outside, whether these be openings from above, or lateral openings. I don’t mean that this abbey by Le Corbusier is Baroque, just that such an enterprise would not have existed without Baroque architecture. You see, in the end, how all sorts of techniques manipulated by the Baroque, like trompe-l’oeil, or the transformative décor in theaters, must be understood starting from this ideal of interiority. Interiority without doors or windows: this means that all there is to see is inside. And if what there is to see is inside, well then, all that is there is to be seen is to be read.
But finally, what is the correlative of this interior without doors or windows? The correlative of this interior is an exterior that contains doors and windows, but precisely, and this is the Baroque paradox, it does not correspond to an interior. What is this? It’s the façade. The façade is pierced with doors and windows; only the façade no longer expresses the interior. Our last definition of the Baroque, for the moment, is to be: the façade achieves independence at the same time as the interior conquers its autonomy. About the correspondence façade and interior, for example, one could say that, in a certain way, the Renaissance architecture implies this correspondence of interior and exterior, and from the façade and the interior is substituted a tension between the façade pierced by doors and windows and the interior ideally without doors or windows. [It’s] as if these two elements had conquered, for one, independence, the independence of the façade in relation to the interior, and for the other, autonomy, the autonomy of the interior in relation to the façade. [Interruption of the recording] [16:04]
That does not prevent there being a relation required, and the relation will no longer be that of correspondence, or then one would have to conceive of correspondences of a new type, such that we find ourselves with a new characterization of the Baroque: the tension between interior and exterior, taking into account their respective, reciprocal independence.
In this sense, for example, a literary critique like Jean Rousset, who wrote a lot about Baroque literature, I believe, saw something quite well, when the second book that he devotes – but strangely, this second book is a bit like his farewell to the Baroque, in which he there has doubts about the notion of the Baroque. But this second book, although he may have doubts, he calls it quite well The Interior and the Exterior.[4] In the first book by Rousset, called Literature of the Baroque Age in France,[5] he wonders in the final part, but what is the Baroque? And he begins by saying quite well: it’s the independence of the façade. And then he passes to another point: and as the façade is independent, that is, no longer expresses the interior, then henceforth the Baroque will constitute an exploded interior (intérieur éclaté).
There it seems to me that it no longer works, and he gives an example of the exploded interior: there is a decorative overload. That no longer works: he’s at once quite right, it’s all very complex, [but] it’s not at all an exploded interior, and the decorative aspect, even in pseudo-overload, this is not at all an explosion. There is necessarily decoration that will appear excessive from a certain point of view because the interior has no doors or windows, so it is not at all an exploded interior, but on the contrary, an interior gathered into itself. As a result, Rousset is all the more correct when he marks this tension between interior and exterior, between the façade and the interior. And precisely by reading [Heinrich] Wölfflin, we find a sentence that appears decisive for me (page 71 of the French translation, of Renaissance et Baroque): “It’s precisely this contrast between the exacerbated language of the façade and the serene peace of the interior that constitutes one of the most power effects that Baroque art exerts over us.”[6] This cannot be expressed better, tension between the newly independent façade from the interior, and the now autonomous interior in relation to the façade. Fine.
So, there is no longer a correspondence, but in what sense? Once again, what is the relation going to be? What is the relation going to be between the independent façade and the autonomous interior? This will be the great problem of the Baroque. I am saying the tension between the façade — that’s why I insisted on this flashback — I am saying the tension between the façade and the interior can only be resolved, in the sense in which one speaks about resolving tension, can only be resolved by the distinction between floors. This is why the articulation between two floors in the Baroque will be substituted for the distinction between two worlds. The interior will be placed on the upper floor, whereas the façade will occupy the entire lower floor. It’s the articulation of the two floors, that is, the fold between two floors, it’s the articulation between two floors that will make possible a new mode of correspondence between the independent façade and the autonomous interior, or if you prefer, what there is to see from the outside, for the façade is a view from the outside since it has no interiority, between what there is to see from outside and what there is to read from the inside.
The upper floor is a reading room, the trompe-l’œil, whatever you like; it’s about reading, the camera obscura, it’s the reading room. So the Baroque unity will once again be what one sees from outside the lower floor, what one reads from within the upper floor. But is there a reading-seeing unity, a reading-vision unity? Is there a bloc, are there blocs of reading-vision? Yes, today one would say that a bloc of reading-vision is the comic strip. Good. But that exists in the Baroque era. The Baroque era, it’s well known, is the emblematic age par excellence. But what is an emblem in the theory of signs? An emblem is a reading-vision bloc. For example, a heraldic emblem is what? A motto or device (devise) and a figure; the devise-figure unity is as old as the world. Why does the Baroque develop these cycles of emblems? Why does the emblem in the Baroque era undergo such a development?
I am nearly developing a thematic consolidation: what is the Baroque? In his book on the Baroque, on drama and the Baroque, what does Walter Benjamin tell us?[7] He tells us: what allegory was has been poorly understood, because it was judged in the name of a value judgment, seeking to make the allegory into a bad symbol. But he says no, that allegory is something differing in nature from the symbol. One needs to oppose allegory to symbol. Good. It matters little how he defines allegory in his text. It’s not at all to have you… It’s for each of us… Well, I’m not able to really get back into this text… but some among you will surely get into it, it’s a beautiful text; it matters little how he defined it. What I retain is the difference in the symbol-allegory nature. Why? Because I would say, in my own perspective and in the simplest way, the symbol is a direct correspondence between an interior and an exterior. Allegory presupposes rupture, the disjunction of interior and exterior. The exterior is given to be seen in a figure, the interior is given to be read in characters, and the correspondence is no longer direct. [Pause]
So what is a correspondence that would no longer be direct? This will be Leibniz’s entire problem. To determine indirect correspondence between levels, that is, between floors. It’s what he will call harmony. [Pause] That allegory henceforth fills the Baroque world as synthesis of visible figures and readable characters; this is entirely necessary! This is what I wanted to tell you. Do you see any points to add?
A student: [Question on architecture]
Deleuze: For architecture, this seems obvious to me. We started off, if you will, from the definition of folds, the fold that goes to infinity, but from this definition, we passed on to the second definition, the exterior becoming independent from an interior [that] becomes autonomous. The “without doors or windows”. And the fold is really what passed between the two, between the façade and the interior, henceforth what articulates the two floors since, once again, the tension of the façade and the interior can only be resolved by the distinction between floors. That’s what I wanted to insist on. Any problems? Everything ok? No, yes? Huh? Yeah?
A woman student: Something bothers me a bit. The camera obscura, in principle, serves to project what one sees onto axes, whereas in fact, if it’s projected on a sphere, on a curve, this use of the camera obscura would seem to be in apparent contradiction with what you said about the use of curves in the Baroque.
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes. It’s not on the same level, you understand? One must not seek to reduce everything. In Leibniz’s texts, there are constantly rectilinear procedures, one must not seek to… How am I going to have you grasp this? — For example, if you take a figure like a triangle, it is obviously rectilinear. For Leibniz, or for Baroque mathematicians, we mustn’t believe that that [the Baroque] implies that there is no straight line, or that there are no rectilinear figures, or that there are no rectilinear structures. All that the Baroque asks is that rectilinear structures be second in relation to curves, whereas the camera obscura itself might be a rectilinear mechanism. This is of no importance; what matters is that, at another level of physics, the curve will be primary in relation to all the straight lines. But that does not presume that one avoids all straight lines. Moreover, when I told you… You see well what occurred with an inflection in the Baroque, it serves to hide a right angle. All you can say is that the inflection manages to round off the angle, but the angle is there…
Just as in Leibniz’s work, in the end, all that Leibniz will ask of you, in the end, is not the disappearance of rectilinear structures, or angular structures, or hard angles. It’s the perpetual passage, thus harmony, that is, the indirect correspondence between rectilinear structures and curvilinear structures, once it’s stated and understood that what comes first is the curvature. If you will, what is first here is a bit like Descartes’s case. For example, Descartes is all that you wish except Baroque, it seems to me. That he privileges rectilinear structures does not preclude that all of Descartes’s physics is a physics of the whirlwind (tourbillon). It’s simply a matter of knowing how he engenders whirlwinds. From the other point of view, that Leibniz creates a physics of curvatures, in the wake of [Christiaan] Huygens, does not at all keep him from perpetually passing into rectilinear structures. It’s simply that, for him, the whirlwind is absolutely primary. This will be primary because nature is fluid, because bodies are elastic, etc. There will perpetually be… For example, hardness [Deleuze writes on the board] has an aspect of elasticity. So this will not at all be due to ignorance about hard angles, once we state that there are hard bodies, hard angles as there are hard bodies. All of this will be reintegrated into a physics that will present itself as first being a physics of hard bodies. [Pause]
A woman student: [Inaudible question concerning the right angle]
Deleuze: He [Leibniz] says it all the time in the methods of limit. We can even conceive of the curve, in fact, as the limit of a series of right angles. We nearly saw it with objects, with the impossibility of perpetually producing an angle along the side. So there you are.
Second point… So, at our last meeting, we moved forward somewhat; we tried to catch up for some lost time, and so I’d like just to sum up a bit. I am saying, we saw several things. The first point: what is sufficient reason? And I am summarizing: sufficient reason – this picks up precisely about the principle of sufficient reason. I am saying, never forget that in Leibniz’s formulation – this is what’s important for me – it’s a principle that reigns over events. This topic of the event is fundamental. Everything that happens has a reason, and I believe that one really must place weight on Leibniz words, what happens. All of Leibniz’s logic is a logic of events. And how is this useful for us? Because the event is the inflection. What occurs is an inflection. And you recall that all of our analyses led us from the inflection to inclusion. Inflection is necessarily included. It’s included in what? In a notion, the notion of the subject. The subject of what? The notion of the subject to which what happens, happens; to whom what happens, happens. So, something happens to something. What happens to something is included in the notion of this thing. We go from the inflection of the event to inclusion. In other words, the event is predicate of the subject; that’s what sufficient reason is: the event is predicate of the subject. That means [that] what happens is included in the notion of that to which something happens. If I say, I fly, I die, I cross the Rubicon, etc., these are events. Their reason is inclusion of these events in my notion.
That’s what we have as first point. Thus, we went from inflection to inclusion. Second point: We were henceforth going to be led toward distinguishing all sorts of types of inclusion according to the propositions considered. And first, [among] the great duality of propositions, it was the propositions of essence and the propositions of existence. Proposition of essence: two and two make four; proposition of existence: Caesar crosses the Rubicon, or Adam sinned. We will call analysis the operation that shows an inclusion. If I show that a given predicate is contained in a notion, I do the analysis. Can the distinction between two types of propositions, proposition of essence of the “2 + 2 make 4” kind, and proposition of existence of the “Caesar has crossed the Rubicon” [kind], be presented in the following way: in the case of propositions of essence, the analysis is finite, that is, we show by a sequence of finite operations that the predicate is included in the subject, and in the case of propositions of existence, the analysis is indefinite? Answer: No, this is the first contradiction that would be altogether unfortunate. Why? Because in the propositions of essence, the analysis cannot be finite whatever one might say since the propositions of essence are – and essentially concern – the deepest levels of the understanding of God. For God is infinite and is only concerned with the infinite. Propositions of essence cannot be susceptible to a finite analysis, whatever one might say. And even if Leibniz seems to say so, it’s simply not possible! Not possible. Even if he says so, he cannot say it. Even it he says it, it’s just a way of speaking. It’s not possible. On the other hand, propositions of existence cannot be indefinite. Why? Because even for God, the resolution of the predicate in the subject is infinite. And there, Leibniz says it formally: God himself does not see the end of the resolution since there is no end. The inclusion of the predicate in the subject implies an infinite analysis, so in both cases, I believe that the analysis is necessarily infinite. Fine.
Given all this, we envisage the case – and I am retracing our path from the last time; I would just like this to be clear — we envisage the case of propositions of essence, of the 2 + 2 make 4 type. What does inclusion consist of?[8] Here this is extremely important, for it’s a web of contradictions, it seems to me, so I beg you both for your good will and your attention. I have to convince you, but it’s up to you to see if you are convinced or not.
First type of inclusion in the proposition of essence is reciprocal inclusions. What a reciprocal inclusion is, for Leibniz, is very precise: it’s the relation of a definite and its definition, provided that the definition is real. What a real definition is — and this we must know by heart — a real definition is a definition that shows the possibility of the defined. It is opposed to the nominal definition, which is a definition that allows one to recognize the defined but does not show its possibility. An example of a real definition: you define 3 by 2 plus 1. Why is this real definition? It’s real definition because it is a definition by primary factors, by primary numbers. [Pause] Between a defined and a real definition, there is a reciprocal inclusion. You can substitute one for the other.
If you link up real definitions, you create a demonstration, and by pursuing that, you reach what Leibniz calls Identicals. What are Identicals? These are the final terms of analysis. However, I have just said that there is no final term. That is not a contradiction; these final terms are themselves necessarily infinite. Thus it’s only a way of speaking, final term; these are infinite terms by themselves, that is, these are absolutely simple terms which henceforth have absolutely nothing to do with one another. This is what Leibniz calls absolutely simple primitive notions. What are absolutely simple primitive notions? I will give you the Leibnizian response: these are forms directly able to be raised to infinity. An example – each time we will test this – can one think of an infinite speed? If so, if one can think of an infinite speed, speed will be an absolutely simple notion. Can one think of an infinitely white white? If so, white is in this case. No, realistically we cannot, and it matters little why, we cannot think of an infinite white. White is always a degree of white. We cannot think an infinite color, let us assume. Can one think of an infinite extension (étendue infinie)? Yes, Descartes says, for example. Leibniz, perhaps, would say no. Directly. Can one think of an infinite extension by itself, directly infinite? Perhaps not. Ok.
What can one think of as infinite? Can one think of an infinite understanding? According to Leibniz, yes, but all that matters little. Whether I reach such forms or not, that’s something else entirely. Whether I reach such forms or not, I will call absolutely simple notions as infinite forms, directly infinite forms. I would say that here, these are no longer reciprocal inclusions since each has nothing to do except with itself. Two absolutely simple notions have no relation with one another. They are, as Leibniz says, disparates. These are Identicals, not in the sense of identical to one another. Each is identical to self. In fact, it refers only to itself. This is no longer in the domain of reciprocal inclusions, but in the domain of auto-inclusions. An Identical is an auto-inclusion. It is the Identical to self. Thus, each absolutely very simple notion is an Identical to self, an auto-inclusion.  The absolutely simple primitive notions are diverse, that is, without any relation with one another, and Leibniz’s paradoxical reasoning – I had tried to explain it the last time, this being why he derives from it a new proof of God’s existence – is precisely because infinite forms, absolutely simple notions have nothing at all to do with each other, they can belong to a same Being; for contradicting itself would still have some relation with something. They can belong to a same being all the more so since they have nothing to with one another.
I see this same reasoning in Spinoza, truly a mode of reasoning in the air at this era. It’s because thought and the extension (l’étendue) strictly have nothing to do with each other that both can be attributes of God. That is, they can be the attributes of a single and same Being. Thus, auto-inclusion of primitive forms allows one to conclude about the singular existence of an infinite being which, henceforth, possesses every infinite form. In other words, if you will, one must say: absolutely simple forms or infinite primitive forms are formally distinct but ontologically are One. This is the new proof of God’s existence, formally distinct but ontologically One. Good. Thus, in principle, we follow the reciprocal inclusions back to auto-inclusions, that is, we follow definitions back to Identicals, the Identicals being undefinable since they only contain self, since each contains only itself. So there, this is the object of what Leibniz calls the Combinatory (Combinatoire). One is supposed to start from simple notions to arrive at composites.[9]
But for us, once again since we do not reach absolutely simple notions which are the basis of God’s understanding; we are finite creatures and don’t get there, and this has no importance. It is unimportant that we don’t get there because we will be happy with relatively simple notions. And what are relatively simple notions which, henceforth, you sense, symbolize with absolute simples? Relatively simple notions are what? This is what Leibniz calls the requisites of a domain. The requisites of a domain are the real definition of objects of a given category. The requisites are relatively simple notions that we do get. An example: I take a domain which is the discontinuous quantity or number, and I say: what is the requisite of the domain? And Leibniz’s response is: it’s primary numbers. Primary numbers are the requisites of any number. But you will tell me that primary numbers are numbers. For Leibniz, yes and no. They are very singular numbers, numbers that are the requisites of any number. I choose another domain, the organism. What is the requisite of forces of a very particular type that I can define, or that Leibniz defined with the lovely name of plastic forces? We have seen quite rapidly what plastic forces consisted of. These are forces that have the power of enveloping infinitely and of developing parts of an organism, of enrolling and unrolling parts of an organism. It’s plastic forces that will define life. If I take the domain of inanimate matter, of inorganic matter, this time the requisites will be elastic forces, by virtue of which all bodies are elastic. Each time, and for each domain, I attain requisites that are relatively simple.
From this I conclude this new point: Leibniz tells us that the predicate is included in the subject, agreed! But what I am going to say is very, very unclear because I still do not have the elements to say it clearly. It’s only to help you sense the problem. Yet again, 2 and 2 are 4. You recall this from our last meeting; I won’t go back over it. I read to you the way in which Leibniz demonstrated it in the New Essays, he demonstrates it very well, grant him that. He demonstrates precisely by decomposition within primary factors. I say: where is the inclusion in 2 and 2 are 4? It’s not where one thinks it is. In fact and that explains, it seems to me, the extent to which Leibniz has been poorly understood, that is, the objections made against him stem from this. Some have wanted to place inclusion there where Leibniz never wanted to place it since Leibniz does not say that 4 would be in 2 and 2, nor that 2 and 2 would be in 4. So where is the inclusion? Why? Understand, it’s that 2 and 2 are 4, one must write it, as always in Leibniz, with an exclamation point : it’s an event. This is idiotic. When one agrees to give importance to the notion of event in Leibniz, one tends to reserve it for propositions of existence, but that is wrong! [It’s] for propositions of essence as well. There are only events in Leibniz.
Before Leibniz, there was a first great philosophy of the event, the Stoics, we shall see. There were none previously. It’s already a creative act in philosophy to tell oneself: well, well, I am going to make a concept out of the event. Aristotle can speak of the event, but for him, it is not a concept; it’s a very derived notion that depends on Aristotle’s concepts, but to take the event as the object of an irreducible concept, that is truly a stroke of genius. In the end, philosophy constantly occurs with strokes of genius like that, where suddenly something is constructed into the state of concept. The concept of the event is signed by the Stoics. Following that, it collapses; a concept has a very discontinuous history. The second great philosophy that will extend the problem of the event and a concept of event is Leibniz. The third will be – and the hour will come for us! — The third will be Whitehead. This is fine, three great philosophers for one concept, that’s enough. [Laughter]
So, I say: 2 and 2 are 4! Understand that this is what the event or the predicate is, so much so that one must not say that “2 and 2” is the subject and 4 is the predicate. When one says that, we really see that it is false. [Bertrand] Russell, who wrote an admirable book on Leibniz, at the same time he reveals a kind of radical incomprehension, but that’s Russell so it’s not serious, because an error from Russell is worth a thousand truths from some jerk (connard). [Laughter] Russell obviously is going to say: you certainly see that it is false that all judgment is a judgment of inclusion; 2 and 2 are 4, you cannot work out an inclusion.[10] Obviously. He would prefer that, according to Leibniz, either 2 and 2 are in 4, or that 4 is in 2 and 2. Well, that’s not it; it’s not at all right. 2 and 2 are 4: it’s the event, that is, the predicate. So you will tell me, where is the subject? And in the subject, it’s primary factors. And what are the primary factors? 1, 2, and 3. In fact, to demonstrate that 2 and 2 are 4, you recall perhaps, Leibniz uses three definitions. The demonstration that 2 and 2 are 4 is the linkage of three definitions, these three definitions mobilize what terms? 1, 2, 3. I would say that 2 and 2 are 4 is the predicate that refers to the subject 1, 2, 3.
So, that goes all wrong, and why? Because – this amounts to my having said: the predicate is the same thing as the event or the relation. We are far from those who say that Leibniz cannot take into account rapports or relations. Why? It seems to me that what Leibniz calls the predicate is precisely what we are calling a relation, hence the source of confusion. We will see this later. I am trying to bring my topic to a close because everything is happening at once.
I say 2 and 2 are 4 is an aggregate of relations, and what Leibniz calls a predicate. To what is it attributed? It’s attributed to requisites, it comes from requisites, it is included in requisites. What are requisites? They are the three primary numbers mobilized by the definitions 1, 2, and 3. 2 and 2 are 4 are in 1, 2, and 3. But you are going to tell me that all this is one big joke since, again one has to think 1, 2 and 3, together. And if you think 1, 2, and 3 together, you have already given yourself over to relations, and a relation cannot be a subject of other relations, so all that is a joke, it’s a joke. It’s not reasonable, it’s not serious. [Pause] And yet it is!
I pass on to propositions of existence. “Caesar crosses the Rubicon,” you do not see that it’s a relation. I say: the predicate is contained in the subject, in the notion of the subject. Yes, but the predicate is the very relation, it is included in the subject “Caesar.” Fine. But you will tell me, the subject “Caesar,” at least him, he is all alone, it’s one subject. Whereas 1, 2, and 3, there are three. Well no, the subject “Caesar,” he is no longer all alone since the subject “Caesar” includes the entire world, and the entire world is constituted not only by the subject “Caesar,” but by the subject “Adam,” the subject “Alexander,” the subject “Nero,” the subject you, me, etc. In other words, one must distinguish two planes: you can think terms distributively, that is, you think them together and each one for its own account. There is still no relation. If we do not make this distinction, it seems to me then that everything crashes. That’s why, for Leibniz, it will not suffice to say: I think terms together so that there would be a relation between them; you can think them together, but each one for its own account, as distributive unities. You think 1, 2, 3, but each for its own account; together, and for its own account, you think the monad “Caesar” and the monad “Cicero” together, but each one for its own account, as sufficient unities.
At a second level, you say: “Caesar crosses the Rubicon,” and there occurs a relation between the monad “Caesar” and the monad “Cicero” since Cicero is going to be quite vexed by Caesar doing that. At a first level, you think 1, 2, 3, each on its own. But when you say 2 plus 2 equals 4, here there are relations between 1, 2, and 3. Such that to the question, from where do relations arise in Leibniz, a question posed by all logicians, it seems to me quite simple. There is no problem. There is no problem. Relations are predicates.
Once something is predicated, is there emergence of the relation? Far from the relation and the predicate being opposed, as Russell thought, the relation is the predicate. Once something is posed as a predicate, the relation is born. What is a predicate? Relations, that is, events. You will tell me that this isn’t clear: how is it that relations and events are the same thing? We will see later – This is difficult. If see have to be able to say it all at once, this would be… Fine. — Thus, it’s very important, in fact. I can say 2 and 2 are 4! is the aggregate of relations, it’s an aggregate of relations which is the predicate of 1, 2, 3, taken as a distributive unity. There is no relation except at the same time, and by and in the predicate since the relation is the predicate.
So here is the system of three types of inclusion relative to truths of essence: auto-inclusions or Identicals, reciprocal inclusions or definitions, non-reciprocal inclusions or requisites. With that, one has given the logic of essence. We pass on to the logic of existence, that is, the propositions of existence. Here this will be the great problem: what is the type of relation between two notions, according to Leibniz? It is no longer a question of simple notions of the type either absolutely simple primitive notion, or the requisite, that is, the relatively simple notion. It is a question of individual notions. They are simple as well, but of an entirely different type. These are notions of the individual. I would say the proper name notions: Caesar, you, me, etc. And here there is inclusion as well.[11] Why? This time, I would say – and it’s what I proposed as the term: a fourth type of inclusion, these are non-localizable inclusions. Why? Because an individual notion does not include a predicate without including the aggregate of the world. The inclusion is therefore non-localizable. What does that mean? If there is a predicate that my notion includes, it is: what I am doing at this moment. That tells us the extent to which it is not at all a question of attributes, but a question of events.[12]
When Leibniz wants to show what an inclusion consists of in an individual notion, he says: what am I doing right now? And the answers are: Monadology, “I write” (j’écris). But it’s enough to read Leibniz’s texts to realize that there is something very odd.  “I write” is what? Don’t tell me that it’s an attribute! It’s a verb. What does Leibniz call a predicate? What he calls a predicate is a verb, “I write”. But Leibniz says: if the verb “I write” or the predicate “I write,” “Caesar crosses the Rubicon,” is a verb, it’s an event. The verb is the event index (indice d’événement). Predicates are verbs. If you do not grasp that, it seems to me, then all Leibniz collapses, and collapses, in fact, in a jumble of contradictions, quite horrible (quelle horreur). “I write”, “I die,” “I sin,” “I commit a sin,” all these are verbs. Simply in the Letters to Arnauld, when he wants to give the example of inclusion of the predicate in the subject, what does he give? “I take a trip,” “I go from France to Germany.” That’s what Leibniz says. “I go from France to Germany”; it’s rather odd, however, on this point, when studies on Leibniz have been presented, he is purported to have said: inclusion of the predicate means that the judgment of existence is: name of a subject + copula (verb to be) + qualifying adjective. I swear to you that he never ever said that! He would have said it if he had wanted to. He says: “I write,” “Caesar has crossed the Rubicon,” “Adam sinned,” “I take a trip,” in other words, one has to listen to him: predicates are verbs, not attributes, not adjectives. They are verbs, and the verb is the character of an event.
Any monad that includes whatever (quoi que ce soit) necessarily includes the entire world. This is for a simple reason that would quite correctly not work on the level of attributes. It’s because every event has a cause: if I write, it’s for this or that reason. I write to my cousin: “My dear cousine, how are you doing?”, there is a reason for this: I heard someone say that she wasn’t well. There is a cause for this cause, then there is a cause for this cause for this cause, etc. So I do not include any old verb without including the infinite series of causes that are equally verbs. In other words, causality is the relation of a verb to another verb. This will be the link of verbs, or the link of events between each other. That’s what causality is. It is entirely necessary that inclusion not be localizable, that is, I include anything whatever; that is, if I include an event that concerns me in the moment, “I write,” I include in this very way the totality of the world, from one cause to another cause. In the end, all verbs are linked to one another. Fine.
Let’s take advantage of this [topic] to deal with this point. Some act as if the theory of inclusion in Leibniz implied a reduction of judgment to the judgment of attribution, and this is Russell’s great theme, in his book on Leibniz. On this, Russell says: this will be embarrassing (embêtant) for Leibniz because as a mathematician and a logician, Leibniz knows quite well that there are relations, and that relations are not attributes. Let us suppose that “the sky is blue,” and that “blue” would be an attribute, and this is not even certain; on the other hand, 2 and 2 are 4, there is no attribute in this. Or again, “Caesar crosses the Rubicon,” this is not an attribute, unless by translating it: is a being crossing (est franchissant) the Rubicon, unless by translating “I write” by: I am a writing being (je suis écrivant; [using present participles]). We see clearly that this is not the same thing, that these are forced reductions. So Russell adds: Leibniz is going to be embarrassed because his theory of inclusion leads him to reduce all judgment to the judgment of attribution. But as a mathematician and a logician, he is the first to know that mathematics and logic are systems of relations that are irreducible to attributes. So he is required to find a status for the relation. What will really trouble him, so Russell says. And in the end, he will say of the relation: the attribute of the subject which compares things. This has to be a joke, because Leibniz never, ever did that. Russell does not conceive that Leibniz could do otherwise since… But everything is wrong from the start. What has been muddled is the inclusion of predicate and attribution, whereas that has no bearing whatsoever. In other words, what Russell confused, something very serious for a logician, is predication and attribution.[13]
Attribution is precisely the rapport between a subject and an attribute, that is, a quality, through the intermediary of the copula to be, for example, the sky is blue. This is what we call a judgment of attribution. From the viewpoint of the judgment of attribution, but indeed from the viewpoint of attribution, the predicate is the attribute. Such that a judgment of attribution will present itself in the form: a subject, the copula to be, the predicate which is an attribute. But the predicate is only an attribute from the viewpoint of the subject of attribution. If a judgment is not of attribution, it nonetheless perfectly has a predicate. The predicate is what is said. This isn’t difficult. It’s what is said. 2 and 2 are 4 is a predicate. About this, logicians say: but no, it isn’t a predicate since there is no subject. They are idiots. [Laughter] It’s not enough not to find a subject in order for there not to be one! If we ask what is the subject of “2 and 2 are 4”, it’s 1, 2, and 3. There you have it. “2 and 2 are 4” is the rapport that is said of 1, 2, and 3, considered as without rapports. 1, 2, and 3, considered as without rapports have a predicate which is the rapport “2 and 2 are 4”. But predicate does not mean attribute; it means: what is said about something. For Leibniz, the predicate is an event. Judgment is not a judgment of attribution; predication is: saying an event of a subject.
Letters to Arnauld: in the letters to Arnauld, I read the small part of the sentence that interests me. Arnauld asks what precisely all this to-do about inclusion means, inclusion of the predicate in the subject. I pull out this little sentence. You must learn it by heart, into your heart, to prevent yourself falling from into any contradiction. The individual notion – that is, Caesar, or you, or me — encloses  — he could say the attribute; no, he does not at all say attribute, ever! Well, yes, at times he says attributum, but that doesn’t matter, because it’s at that moment the synonym of predicate. One must say the attribute is the event, but that changes nothing – he says: “the individual notion encloses that which refers to existence and to time.” What does that mean: “that which refers to existence and to time”? It’s the predicate. That which refers to existence and time is said of a subject. But that which refers to existence and time, it’s not an attribute; in the strict sense of the word attribute, it’s not an attribute. What is it? It’s an event. It’s even a perfect definition of the event, only nominal; that does not show how an event is possible. It’s a very good nominal definition of the event to say: the event is that which refers to existence and to time. In this sense, there is no event without rapports. The event is always a rapport, it is not only a rapport with existence and time, but it is a rapport to existence and to time.
So above all, do not believe that predication in Leibniz could be reduced, as Russell believes, to an attribution. If this were the case, Leibniz would indeed slide into all the contradictions you might want. But far from being an attribute, the predicate is the relation or the event, that is, the relation to existence and to time in the case of propositions of existence. And here, this is close to the Stoics. There is a precedent in the new logic of the Stoics that, alas, we know so poorly, of which we have only miserable fragments from the ancient Stoics, alas. It is not a sacrilege to say: we could have done with a bit less of Plato and a bit more of the Stoics. Well, one mustn’t say things like that; we must be content with what we have, but, you understand, our hierarchy of ancient thought is very much linked to: we make do with what we have given all that has been lost; we really just don’t realize. Very little remains for us, but what little does remain, especially thanks to commentators, those that have remained, [through] the ancient commentators, we see quite well the new logic that they [the Stoics] were undertaking, the terms in which they broke with Aristotle. The judgment of attribution, in fact, we can say that it derives from the tradition – here I don’t want to get mixed up with Aristotle, we would never at all complete [our work] – but I can say summarily that it derives directly from the Aristotelian tradition: Subject + verb to be + quality. This is the judgment of attribution.
But the great rupture of the Stoics is to say: no, the event, the world is made of events, and events do not synch with this schema. What is the predicate of a proposition? It is not the quality attributable to a subject; it’s the event, the event stated in a proposition. The event, of the type: “The sun is coming up (Il fait jour)”! And the link between two events creates the true object of logic, of the kind: “If the sun is coming up, it’s bright out”, the linkage of events between themselves. The dialectic will be defined by the Stoics as the link of events between themselves. Events are predicates in judgment, in the proposition, from which develops a logic of an entirely different kind than Aristotelian logic, with an entirely different set of problems. For example: what does a proposition tending toward the future mean? A future event? A naval battle will occur tomorrow. Does this proposition have a sense, has it no sense? In what way does it have sense? What sense does it have? And when the naval battle has taken place, then has the proposition changed modality? Can a proposition henceforth change modality with time? [There are] all sorts of problems, that which have a rapport with existence and with time. In other words, as they say, the event is the expressible of the proposition. The predicate or the event is the expressible of the proposition.
You see, once again, I insist on this because it’s the fundamental contradiction: the inclusion of the predicate in the subject in Leibniz. I am nonetheless beginning my transition: Leibniz is going to take up, is going to be inspired by this logic of the event, and he is going to give an entirely new orientation to this logic. In what form? In the form (which wasn’t at all Stoic, this one): events or predicates or relations, all of this is the same, events are included in the individual notion of that to which they happen. That is Leibniz’s fundamental contribution to a logic of the event. The event is included in the individual notion of that to which it happens, or of those to which they happen. Difficult? No, not difficult, to the contrary, it’s quite clear. You see that the inclusion of the predicate in the subject for Leibniz is a fundamental step in a theory of the event which has nothing to do with a theory of attribution and of the judgment of attribution. Here is what I absolutely wanted to say since, once again, no text by Leibniz that I know of authorizes the reduction of judgment or of the proposition, according to Leibniz, to a judgment of attribution. You understand?
Something very important results from this: it’s that, in the correspondence with Arnauld, there is a passage where Leibniz – you know, Leibniz had quite a lot of bad faith with his correspondents, but it’s normal, it’s quite legitimate — At one moment in their exchange of letters, Arnauld is very clever; sometimes he is very intelligent. He says to Leibniz: but you know, your whole thing rests on your giving a rather new definition of substance, so if one defines substance as you do, obviously you are correct in advance. But is it possible to define it in this way? And here, Leibniz is going to undertake some exercises of high acrobatics: how is it new? What I am saying isn’t at all new. What does it consist of? Arnauld tells him : you define substance by its unity ; and what you call substance is finally a unity. In fact, the Monas, we saw, [is] unity. Here Leibniz immediately responds and says: you are really telling me something quite strange, that it’s surprising to define substance by unity, but everyone has always done that. Arnauld ends up saying: ok, everyone has perhaps done that. He is not entirely convinced. He is entirely right not to be convinced. All this, he throws onto Descartes. Descartes does not at all define substance by unity. How was substance defined by the seventeenth century Classics? They defined it by its essential attribute, otherwise it is undefinable. The thinking substance is defined by an essential attribute which is the thought and from which it [the substance] is inseparable. There is, it’s the case in which truly to say it, there is reciprocal inclusion between substance and its essential attribute. It is the essential attribute “thought” that defines the thinking substance. It’s the essential attribute “extension” that defines the extended substance or the corporal substance, for Descartes. A substance is inseparable from its essential attribute and, inversely, substance is defined by the essential attribute. I would say that at that moment, the entire Classical age is essentialist.[14]
Notice that the essential attribute is indeed an attribute. It’s an attribute. But, how marvelous it for me to be so correct, if I dare to say: Leibniz justifiably wants nothing to do with this definition. That is, for him, judgment is not a judgment of attribution. He does not want to define substance by its essential attribute. Why? Because for him, it’s an abstraction, and substance is concrete. This suggests the extent to which he rejects the judgment of attribution; he wants nothing of it. How is he going to define it? A substance is, in fact, a unity. It is One. So Leibniz can say: but everybody always said that substance was One. But for others — that’s where we encounter a dialogue of the deaf with Arnauld — for others, unity was a property of substance, it wasn’t its essence. Essence was an essential attribute, the attribute from which it was inseparable. As a result, it was one to a certain extent, but it was a property of substance, being One, whereas for Leibniz, it is its essence: the only essence of substance is to be One. It is monad. It is monas. It’s unity that defines substance: that’s what is new.
Henceforth, to the correlation substance-essential attribute as it is found in Descartes, what is going to appear in Leibniz? An entirely different kind of correlation: substantial unity which is going to be correlated with all manners of being (manières d’être) of this unity. I understand well: substance is no longer related to an attribute, it is related to manners. It is no longer related to an essence, its essence is tossed behind, it is One. It has no other essence. On the other hand, what it has is manners. The fundamental rapport is no long substance-attribute, the fundamental rapport is substance-manners of being. Substance has manners of being. Is it exaggerated to say that to Classic essentialism is opposed Leibniz’s mannerism? For what do we call mannerism? We’ll call mannerist is a conception or a vision, a philosophical conception or pictorial vision that characterizes a being by its manners. We have to take manners in the most literal sense of the term: manners of being. To the rapport substance-essential attribute, Leibniz substitutes the rapport substantial unity-manners of being. Yet again, this reveals the extent to which it has nothing to do with a judgment of attribution.
So who de we account for this? You see, the world is in the individual notion exactly as, rather… The world, that is, the series of events, constitutes the manners of being of the subject for each subject: “I write,” “I am born”, “I write,” “I die,” “I go to Germany,” “I cross the Rubicon”, etc. In any case, each monad expresses the totality of the world. Each monad expresses the world, each substantial unity expresses the world; in other words, the world is the manner of being for substantial unities. The world is the predicate of the subject. It’s the manner of being of substantial unity.
So what is that? [Deleuze goes to the board and writes] Let’s call that a portion, or a knot ! It’s the great Baroque knot. The great Baroque knot is the famous knot in the history of mythology called the Gordian knot. And what is the Gordian knot? It’s included in the medical caduceus. The Gordian knot is two indiscernible snakes. I mean: the Gordian knot is a knot that neither begins nor ends. It’s the knot that the great king Gordias had made so that his royal chariot, the yoke and the hitch, were well connected. You know that in mythology, there is an entire history of knots that are basic, these are magic signs par excellence, and the Gordian knot is one of the most beautiful magic signs. It’s a knot without beginning or end, that is, from which nothing can escape. It’s the perfect knot, it’s the knot within itself, it’s the absolutely closed knot. [Deleuze draws the Gordian knot] And we are told that the great king Alexander, in the presence of the Gordian knot, irritated that he was unable to undo it, very difficult to undo a knot without an end, he took his sword and cut through it. That’s what Alexander did. This means that the two elements of the Gordian knot are perhaps inseparable.
Leibniz with Arnauld, he’s amazing, he makes Arnauld see it, all the more amazing since Arnauld has no time for it, he’s annoyed, he says he has other things to do. He says: I have to think about the Holy Trinity, [Laughter] while your metaphysics bores me. Leibniz takes this badly and says: but if you understand my metaphysics, you understand the Holy Trinity. Which, in fact, is true, certainly, among other benefits. He loved to make lists of all the benefits there were from understanding his own philosophy. [Laughter] He spent his time saying, in his correspondence with Arnauld: look here, God did not create monads, that is, individual notions, he created the world. God created the world in which Adam sins. God doesn’t create the sinner Adam – it’s a way of saying that it’s not God’s fault if Adam sins – he creates the world in which Adam sinned. You follow me? But this proposition is null if you don’t link to it the second proposition. So God did not create individual notions; he creates the world to which these individual notions refer. Second proposition: but pay attention, the world does not exist outside individual notions that it includes, that it envelops. How can we schematize this? This consists in saying perpetually: monads are for the world, subjects are for the world, the world is in monads, in subjects. If you suppress one of the two propositions, all is lost.
So let’s try. To take stock of the Leibnizian knot: the Ego-the world, the subject-the world, at first sight, one wants to draw this. Why? Because I make the world bigger than the subject since there is an infinity of subjects. You see, all this is illuminating, it’s the Gordian knot, of which one loop is quite small; but you again find the Gordian knot. It’s the great Baroque torsion, it’s Mannerism; that’s the photo of Mannerism, we just have to complete it. I complete it with two little arrows that indicate that the individual notion is for the world. Now I must indicate that the world does not exist outside the individual notion, I indicate that, in the broken dots. My big circle is only in broken dots. [Deleuze continues to draw on the board][15] There, suddenly, it’s obvious that the monad is for the world, but the world is in the monad, provided that I add arrows that cause the world to return into the monad. There, that becomes perfect. But there is not solely one monad, there is not solely one individual notion, there’s an infinity of them: all of you, Caesar, Alexander, etc., of which each one includes the entire world in its own point of view. I have to take this into account as well. [Deleuze continues drawing] Each little loop will be an individual notion. What is the Baroque torsion par excellence? It’s a chiasmus; it’s an intertwining (entrelacs). Is this ok? In fact, it’s an infinity. The world – individual substances, individual notions: each one for the others, the other in each one. Once again, it’s a rapport of subjects and of the world.
Very quickly, I am saying that what seems very interesting to me is an experience like Merleau-Ponty’s. The rapport of subject and the world, you know the extent to which it was involved in phenomenology and Heidegger, being born in the world. The common theme of Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty is: at the beginning, in Husserl and his disciples, the rapport of subject and the world is presented in the form of intentionality. Early on, Heidegger distinguishes himself from Husserl and the Husserlians by breaking with intentionality, and substituting for it what he calls being-in-the-world. In fact, that connects quite well to the text by Merleau-Ponty, stating: one had indeed to break with intentionality because intentionality by itself, such as it was defined by Husserl, does not guarantee for us that it’s anything other than a simple “learning” [English in the text], a simple psychological apprenticeship. So if one wants to escape from psychology, intentionality did not suffice. So how to escape from it? Merleau-Ponty takes this up after Heidegger. You have only to return to a text like The Visible and the Invisible, he says it himself: what’s going to replace intentionality is the chiasmus, the intertwining, this kind of world-subject torsion. And it’s what Heidegger will later call the fold. It’s curious how all these notions come back to us. And to add [to this], in his notes at the end of his life, Merleau-Ponty never ceases referring to Leibniz, it’s curious. Take a long posthumous note published at the end of The Visible and the Invisible, [Deleuze returns to his seat and consults the text] a very interesting, long note on Leibniz (p. 276), a whole page on Leibniz, where he says: “The expression of the universe in us” — that is, each monad includes the universe or expresses it — “is certainly not the harmony between our monad and others” — that’s counter to Leibniz, but he uses a Leibnizian language — “it is what we see in perception, to be taken as such instead of explaining it. Our soul has no windows, which means being in the world (In der Welt Sein).”[16] Very interesting because what he substitutes for Husserlian intentionality, for Heidegger this will be the fold of the being and state of being (de l’être et de l’étant), and for Merleau-Ponty, this will be the Chiasmus, that is, the portion of the world and the subject. At the end, Merleau-Ponty wavers, to some extent, between Leibniz and Heidegger. This is what I wanted to summarize for you.
You are going to take a short break, but a very short one, since we have reached this point. So here we are, that’s what inclusion is in the propositions of existence; it’s therefore this torsion as we have just seen. So we have exactly reached – please grant me another minute of your time – it’s exactly this: yes, but there’s a great difference between propositions of essence and propositions of existence. The difference is this: in propositions of essence, the contrary is contradictory, that is, 2 and 2 do not make 4; it’s contradictory or impossible. In the propositions of existence, you say that the world is in the world. It’s quite possible; the world is in the individual notion, but still one has to explain this; you can always think of Adam as not sinning, that is, the contrary. The world in which Adam sinned is inside Adam, agreed; that’s why Adam sins. But in the end, Adam non-sinner is not contradictory. Whereas you cannot speak without contradiction in saying 2 and 2 don’t make 4. You cannot say it without contradiction: the circle is squared. Whereas you can say without contradiction: Adam does not sin, and you can think of Adam non-sinner. So here, the contrary is not contradictory, it is not contradictory in itself. This is what one must explain. How to explain something like that? I mean, Adam non-sinner is not impossible. Adam non-sinner is possible. One has to explain it one way or another. [Interruption of the recording] [1:50:23] [Pause in the session]
Part 3
… So fine, listen to me because this is becoming a very pathetic and very essential problem. How is it possible or me to think of Adam non-sinner? Let’s try to pose the problem concretely: Adam non-sinner is contrary to Adam sinner. The rapport between Adam sinner and Adam non-sinner is a rapport of contradiction. My question is: can we localize another type of rapport? Yes, we have to. This matter is not easy, and you sense that I am penetrating into a rather special Leibnizian concept: the concept of incompossibility. The compossible and the incompossible in Leibniz [are] not the same thing as the possible and the impossible. But where do we situate this rapport of compossibility and incompossibility? Between Adam sinner and Adam non-sinner, the relation is one of contradiction. It is impossible that Adam would be both a sinner and non-sinner. So, where would another, more complex rapport be? If you have followed me, there indeed has to be a more complex rapport. This time it’s not the rapport between Adam non-sinner and Adam sinner, but the rapport between Adam non-sinner and the world in which Adam sinned. In this, there is a rapport which is not contradiction or impossibility. Besides, if not, we have no choice, because otherwise, we don’t see what Leibniz means with his rapport of compossibility and incompossibility. I must say: Adam sinner and Adam non-sinner are contradictory. But Adam non-sinner is not contradictory with the world in which Adam sinned, it is incompossible, such that Adam non-sinner is possible, in contrast to 2 and 2 make 5. It is simply incompossible with the world in which Adam sinned. [Pause]
So there is indeed a sphere, a zone in which incompossibility is distinguished from contradiction. Being incompossible is not the same thing as being contradictory, it’s another relation. So, what does being incompossible mean? Leibniz’s famous formula: “Adam non-sinner is incompossible with our world,” that is, with the world in which Adam has sinned. But it is not contradictory; what is contradictory is “Adam sinner” and “Adam non-sinner”, but the relation Adam non-sinner and the world in which Adam sinned goes beyond contradiction: it’s a rapport of incompossibility. Incompossibility is a very, very curious notion, a notion that appears only in Leibniz.
What is vexing is that – there is a Leibniz text, particularly clear on incompossibility. I will read it: “So we do not know where incompossibility comes from” — that is, he affirms the irreducibility of the incompossible to contradiction — “we do not know where incompossibility comes from out of the diverse” — diverse things, diverse substance –; “that is, we do not know what could cause diverse essences to reject one another”. We don’t know. He says: there is incompossibility, it is not reduced to contradiction, and we do not know where the incompossible comes from. We don’t know what makes “Adam non-sinner” incompossible with the world in which Adam sinned. We understand the contradictions, we do not understand the incompossibilities: we can only take note of them. Fortunately there is another text in which Leibniz says – in the scholarly Gerhard edition, the philosophical works are in seven volumes, I believe. There are several editions like that since I explained to you the state of the manuscripts, so it’s a very great edition. It’s in volume 7, page 195, something I want to verify. On the other hand, you will not find them since they are unlocatable. [Laughter] No, they have just been re-edited. So you can find the Gerhard edition, but it’s difficult in France; you would need to get it from Germany. After all, just ask your bookstore owner! So, [volume] 7-[page] 95, I assure you that’s it, in Latin, a Latin text, I translated it without mistake, without misunderstanding.
So there is another text, in La Théodicée, a very fine text saying: although we might not understand, we can grasp in general, which authorizes therefore for once to be more Leibnizian that Leibniz, you understand; but I have my text that authorizes this, it gives us permission. Here is what he says about another subject, the subject of grace, the problem of grace: “If someone asks why God does not give to everyone the grace of conversion” Etc. “What happens? We have already answered this in some way: not in order to find the reasons of God” — you see: it’s not a question of finding the reasons of God, that’s too obscure, it’s beyond us, it’s infinity, we saw that — “but to show that he could not be without them”. This is a marvel. It is not a question for us, poor finite creatures, of finding the reasons of God, but it’s a question for us to show that God in every case does not lack reasons. So we do not know which ones, but all we want is to know that he does not lack them, and the rest is his business. Which gives me the right to say the same thing for incompossibility: fine, we don’t know what the rapport consists of, [but] these are God’s reasons. But we can nonetheless show that it does not keep it from being a rapport, and a rapport irreducible to contradiction.
We can go on; we can create a hypothesis provided that it is supported by certain texts by Leibniz: let’s start from my monad Adam. I start off from the individual notion Adam, so let’s start. [Deleuze returns to the board and starts drawing][17] Here you have to play close attention; this is going to be a very, very strange thing. Henceforth, since you are tired, I am just going to create a schema, and then the next time, we will consider it in depth. The next time we will start from there, we won’t backtrack, I swear it.
I am saying: in the monad Adam, certainly, he expresses the world, and he is for the world; everyone is included. But you recall [Leibniz’s] idea: how are two individual subjects distinguished when each expresses everyone? Fine, each one expresses the totality of the world, but each also only expresses clearly a small portion of the world. So given two individual notions, both express the entire world, but only express clearly a small portion: if I have my monad without doors or windows, each has a clear zone that belongs to it. At first glance – and I say at first glance because this gets more complicated — this is how two monads are distinguished: they do not have the same region of inclusion or clear expression as the neighbor. This means that you, you, you have a little zone of clear expression which is not the same as mine.
So there is a hierarchy of souls. Assume that one is facing a monad with a huge region, a quite voluminous region of clear expression. I would say that all things considered, it is worth more than one that has a tiny one; and to perfect oneself, that is, to do philosophy, [Laughter] is to increase one’s zone of clear perception. What? Does having a sports car increase one’s zone of clear expression? On this [point], I know of texts for and texts against. [Laughter] Physically, yes; morally, no. There is a physical progression, but a moral collapse, so one has to bring in so many factors. [Laughter] But making music, that increases one’s zone of clear expression considerably. It depends on what music. [Laughter] Fine, what was I saying? We are only interested in Adam’s zone of clear expression, that is, the portion of the world that, in the end, concerns him directly. I am trying to mark this out, and we will see what this marking means.
First trait: Adam is the first man. What does this first trait mean? It’s a predicate, it’s not an attribute, it’s an event, “And God created the first man,” it’s even a very considerable event. It’s my first predicate of Adam. Second trait: “living in a garden.” Up to here, it’s textual from Leibniz. I’ll tell you when I no longer have the texts to support me. For the moment, I have all the texts on my side. Third trait: “having a woman born from his rib.”[18] A woman is born from Adam’s rib, this is an event as well. You see, three events: being the first man, living in the garden, have a woman born from his rib, three events.
Fourth event: enduring a temptation. [Laughter] I would say that these are predicates, as well as being verbs. These are events. What does that mean, events? It means inflections; these are inflections if you recall what we have considered previously. This is a snaking line that goes from predicate to predicate. I can now give these inflections a more precise term. This word is one we have used during the first trimester; I’d say that these are singularities. A singularity is an inflection, that is, something that happens. You see, the essential thing is, above all, do not confuse “singular” and “individual”. Adam the individual is the subject, the individual notion. Singularities are his predicates that belong to him; these are the predicates that he includes in his clear zone: being the first man is a singularity; living in the garden is a singularity. The singularities are events.
Every event, moreover… So I’d say [that] an event is not a complex of singularities. [Pause] It’s only the notion of singularity that is a fundamental mathematical notion since it concerns what  happens to the curve, what happens to the line. For example, we will say about a square that it has four singularities. These four singularities are defined there where it changes direction, that is, when something happens. Between two singularities, what is there? Here I am saying things for which I apologize to those of you who are familiar with math, but you mustn’t resent my saying such elementary things. I’d say that between two singularities, there is a line what we’ll call, let’s suppose, a line of ordinaries, of ordinary points. So it’s more complicated than that because… but no matter. Here we have a square with four singularities. What can I say? As Leibniz says, in a beautiful phrase from New Essays on Human Understanding, “What is remarkable” – let’s understand this for the moment as the same thing as “singular”; in fact, it’s not quite that, but no matter – “What is remarkable” – he’s speaking as a mathematician – “must be composed of parts that are not such”. “What is remarkable”… In other words, a singularity is composed of ordinary parts. What does that mean? Well, it’s the coincidence, a singularity, it’s the coincidence of two ordinaries. You see? An ordinary from line 1 and an ordinary from line 2, the two ordinaries coincide in a singularity. Good… All that… Leibniz continues, and these are not metaphors, eh? It’s really mathematical logic. The predicates insofar as being events are singularities, complexes of singularities.
There we are, so grant me… I can… With a given individual notion, I can extract singularities from it. Let’s suppose… There’s a fine term used by mathematicians, I believe, which is the surgery of singularities. I do an extraction of singularities. I operate on Adam. Let’s operate on Adam. To operate on Adam means what? It’s to extract, in a precise order, the singularities that are included in his notion. So you can do this; you can undertake a Leibnizian exercise on your own life. And you will see that it’s very interesting, understand? Take your life, and you do your own surgery, a logical surgery. This will be in your life as you see it, extracting singularities, that is, the moments that constitute events. That happens a lot depending on the scale: a bird’s flight, a close-up view; there are lots, and it matters little. That is, finally, at a spot where it seemed ordinary, you will perhaps see that it’s already all singularities. There are perpetually singularities [going] into singularities, and you also find the opposite, that where you thought something was singular, it was ordinary. Two ordinaries are needed for there to be a singularity. The coincidence of two ordinaries is required for there to be a singularity.
So, all this doesn’t go without saying, and you’ll see. You will do your surgery of singularities, and fifty years later, you’ll have henceforth an understanding of yourself entirely better than with ten years of psychoanalysis… [Laughter; inaudible comments by Deleuze to the students] What?
A student: Have you done your own surgery?
Deleuze: Eh? Why yes, obviously… obviously… [Pause] What was I saying? … Ah, right.
What have you done? By undertaking the extraction of singularities in a notion, you have done nothing but unfold a portion of the world that it included, that it enveloped. You have unfolded how the monad Adam expresses the world, includes the world; you have unfolded a tiny portion by marking the inflections: being born the first man, living in a garden, being with a woman born from his rib, enduring a temptation. The snake indeed comes; it’s series of inflections, right? Good. [Pause] How is it that these four singularities belong to the same world? That is, that they belong to the same world you will express by saying that they are compossible; they are compossible. [Pause; Deleuze returns to his seat]
If you accept the problem… Starting from here, I have no more texts, but in some ways, none are needed because we have no choice. We must indeed undertake the following operation, in appearance mathematical, but we will see what’s happening in mathematics.[19] I can take my first singularity as my first singularity extracted from Adam. I can take it as the center of a circle, the center of a circle whose radius ends in the neighborhood (voisinage) – neighborhood, also from mathematics – in the neighborhood of the following singularity, singularity 2. Singularity 1 [is] with the first man; singularity 2 [is] living in the garden. I take my first singularity, which is: here is how God created the world. God took the first singularity as the center of a circle whose radius goes all the way to the neighborhood – my whole figure here [Deleuze indicates what he is drawing] is childish, really childish; attached to it… — For the moment, there’s nothing mathematical – to the neighborhood of the second singularity. You will tell me, it’s going in all directions! Well yes, but what about the world? There’s an infinity of cases in the world prior to Adam. You will say, not really, it’s seven days. But, it’s seven biblical days! Seven days in an infinity!
So, for the last one there, we have every reason to create a circle. There we are. Now, you situate yourself at the level of the second singularity, being in the garden. You take it, with the center of the circle, but it’s a circle, or is it the focus of an ellipsis since everything is suitable? I am providing the simple illustration. [Deleuze draws] So you trace a center there, and then you trace a circle with the radius going to the neighborhood of the first singularity. They have a part in common; if you draw the line, it goes from the first to the second singularity. There’s a part in common for both circles. [Pause] Suppose that this part in common is endowed with constant values in both directions. If this part in common has constant values in both directions, where is the limit? If the infinity of points of this part in common have a constant value in both directions, you will say that the series that goes from the first to the second singularity and from the second to the first one is a convergent series. [Pause] Have you understood? And you do the same things closer and closer for the second and third ones. Each time if… [Deleuze sits down] Each time you say, the series is convergent if the portion in common between the two circles is endowed with constant values. That is, if these are the same values, for example, if these are the same values of garden that we find when going from “the first man” to “being in the garden” and from “being in the garden” to “the first man”, if these are the same values, the series is convergent. Ok? If you agree, there’s more!
Suppose now that you arrive at something where you draw your circles, and the two paths don’t have common values, that is, the portion in common doesn’t have common values, the portion in common to both circles doesn’t have common values. In the end, that comes down to saying that the two circles do not intersect, that is, the series going from one singularity to another one is divergent. Fine. So, we have won! Here there is incompossibility; there’s incompossibility, that is, you draw your circles in convergence, and the series is not convergent. The series occupying the portion in common is not convergent. There is a divergence of the series.
So this is marvelous! Look at what you would reach if all this is true. It’s an infallible method for creating the world. God starts out; then, he tosses out the event, the first man, 1; and then the event, being in the garden; and then the event, having a woman born from his rib; and then the event, endure the temptation. And the series from one singularity to another are convergent series. Henceforth, all that is compossible. Then you reach “enduring a temptation”, and this is convergent. And then you toss out the new event, resisting the temptation. Aie, aie, aie, it’s diverging, it’s diverging! Henceforth, that belongs to another world; that belongs to another world, for all that is not compossible with this world. In order to resist the temptation, there would have had to be another garden that has other values: another rib, or no rib at all, another generation. You see? The common values for both series that intersect are no longer convergent; they are not constant. There would have had to be other plants in the garden. Resisting temptation is incompossible with the world chosen by God. God could have chosen the world in which Adam resists temptation and doesn’t sin. Fine, understood, but that would have been a world that diverges from our own.
What am I saying? Something quite simple: how is it that incompossibility wouldn’t be contradictory? [Deleuze speaks here extremely deliberately, word by word] I believe that being compossible is when the extension of a singularity to another one occurs through a convergent series, and incompossibility is when the extension of a singularity to another implies a divergent series. What is this? All of this is odd. Fine, this seems odd to me. So, on this point, please allow me – this leads directly to our next meeting – allow me to read to you a very clear passage, however, concerning some very detailed mathematics, developed after Leibniz but with a very Leibnizian basis, by a great mathematician who, in some ways, is close to Leibniz, named [Karl] Weierstrass. [Deleuze spells it out] So here we are, I am reading this from a text by Albert Lautman, a specialist in the philosophy of mathematics, who died during the war, dead during deportation or shot, I don’t recall, and who had begun some very important research. [It’s] on page 21 of a book by Lautman that’s been re-edited in a paperback collection, a very great book on the philosophy of mathematics entitled Essays on the Notions of Structure and Existence in Mathematics. Lautman examines Weierstrass’s theory, or rather Weierstrass’s method.
“An analytical function” – I am reading very, very slowly so that you will have time – “An analytical function is defined by Weierstrass in the neighborhood of a complex point” – no matter, I take this as a typical example; even those who haven’t studied mathematics at all can understand this, I assume; it doesn’t matter whether or not you know what an analytical function is, no matter; you can translate this by “a certain type of function” – “An analytical function is defined by Weierstrass in the neighborhood of a complex point” – no matter that you don’t know what a complete point is; just hold on to a point, a particular kind of point – “by a series of powers of numerical coefficient” – no matter that you don’t know what this is; I will repeat: “An analytical function is defined by Weierstrass in the neighborhood of a complex point by a series of powers of numerical coefficient.” I maintain that this sentence is philosophically intelligible for anyone. Period. “The method of analytical prolongation” – this is Weierstrass’s method – “allows an entire domain to be constructed closer and closer in which the function is called analytical and is done so in the following manner.” See, first, I define a function in the neighborhood of a complex point; second, starting from this, I am going to undertake through prolongation a series of powers of numerical coefficient; third, what does this analytical prolongation consist of? “One takes as the new center a point inside the first circle.” Oh, excuse me, I’ve forgotten. I skipped over something, something essential. I’ve skipped over it, [Deleuze laughs] and you’re in danger of not understanding this. [Deleuze repeats the quote from the start]
“An analytical function is defined by Weierstrass in the neighborhood of a complex point by a series of powers of numerical coefficient that converge in a circle of convergence around a point. The method of analytical prolongation allows an entire domain to be constructed closer and closer in which the function is called analytical and is done so in the following manner. In this way, one obtains both a new series and a new circle of convergence that overlaps with the first. The new series prolongs the first one” – this is what is important for us – “The new series prolongs the first one if their values coincide in the part in common for both circles.” You see? “The new series prolongs the first one if their values coincide in the part in common for both circles. In this way, the series can be prolonged in all directions all the way to the points in the neighborhood of which the series obtained would diverge.”
There you are. That’s all I need; I need nothing more than this ending. “The new series prolongs the first one if their values coincide in the part in common for both circles. In this way, the series can be prolonged in all directions all the way to the points in the neighborhood of which the series obtained would diverge.” Leibniz’s mathematics, you recall, being based at least in part on infinite series, I believe that the use here of this conception from Weierstrass is possible as regards Leibniz. What does this come down to saying? [Deleuze goes to the board] Let’s recall our story: if [there is] Adam resisting temptation, fine, it’s possible. You see, it’s still possible with two worlds because you cannot obtain it by analytical prolongation of series. There you fall into divergence; you fall into a divergence of the series. So, resisting temptation is incompossible with this world.
Let’s forget this momentarily. Let’s try to imagine something. How would I define the individual? One has to seize the moment. Let’s return to the matter of nominal definition-real definition. [Deleuze sits down] I was saying earlier, two monads or two individual notions are distinguished in this: that they do not express, that they do not include the same clear and distinct portion. This was already a way of distinguishing two individuals. But this doesn’t work; it’s the reverse. Two individuals are distinguished, no. Two individuals are not distinguished because they express a different clear and distinct portion. One must say the opposite, based on the evidence. They express different portions because they are distinguished. In other words, this is a nominal definition of the individual, not having the same clear zone. This is a nominal definition; it’s not a real definition. I must have a real definition of the individual.
What is an individual? What is an individual notion? I have it, a purely Leibnizian definition, so Leibnizian that he didn’t provide it. It’s as if that went too much without saying for him. I’d say that an individual is a condensation of singularities able to be prolonged; it’s a condensation of singularities able to be prolonged, that is, it’s a condensation of convergent singularities. Notice the importance of distinguishing between singular and individual. It’s that singularities by themselves are not individuals; they are pre-individuals. They are pre-individuals exactly like the world is primary in relation to individual notions, these that do not exist independently. The world is primary in what sense? God created the world, not the notions. Simply he created the world in such a way that this world he created does not exist outside the notions, but the notions derive from the world.
Thus, the individual notions result from the world. The individual notion of Adam results from the world, which itself encompasses the events “having a first man,” that one “situated in a garden,” creating “a woman from the rib of the first man”. Singularities are pre-individual. So there is no vicious circle. When I say the individual, this is a condensation of a certain number of pre-individual singularities insofar as they converge with one another. [Pause] Another Adam, an Adam non-sinner, was possible… [Interruption of the recording] [2:35:07]
… so that one understands existences and their laws of incompatibility. Furthermore, perhaps already the incompossibilities are implicated in mathematics at the level of convergent series and divergent series. In any case, I can say [that] the border of our world is always the states of world [états de monde]. To create a linkage with states of our world would imply a divergence of series. [Pause] Understand?
Here is exactly what I would like to ask you.[20] Do you… In your view, and excuse me for asking you this, is this ok as a starting point or not?[21]
That’s right… Whereas in fact, you notice the essential point; in Weierstrass’s method, the method makes no sense. [Marek continues] … which is inside the circle. That’s right, that’s right, that’s right, but at the same time… You show very, very well how the schema to which that belongs does not coincide finally with Weierstrass’s schema, and at the same time, I have a feeling that it’s the same approach. But it’s here then, that this escapes me, this escapes me, that is, one would have to say… [Marek continues] It’s a new series… That’s right… It exists only in the zone in common. Yes, yes, yes, but from that moment on where a new series… But he… Isn’t it because his departure point is the complex points? [Response from Marek] … Yes, because it goes in all directions. [A long comment by Marek during which Deleuze goes to the board] Whereas I only conserve from the circles the radii, that is, the linear structures… [Marek continues] … In fact, here where you clarify things enormously, it’s undoubtedly for this reason that I am forced to place my neighboring circle before my following singularity, whereas he necessarily takes… [Marek continues] … But can one say that my own schema would be like an elementary simplification, that my rectilinear schema would be an elementary simplification of his own schema which is, as you say, for the plane and not for the line? [A long response by Marek addressing links between Leibniz’s conception of numbers and the schemas being considered, to which Deleuze finally responds]
I was not at all aware of that; I see what you are saying, but I know very, very little about this. [Marek continues] That would be amazing, and would you like to tell us a bit about this aspect of the topic at the next class?
Marek: [Inaudible comment ending with]: I’ll be able to speak about this better the next time.
Deleuze: Great! Isabelle [Stengers], are you aware of this?
Isabelle Stengers: Not about the numbers.
Deleuze: Not about the numbers. [Brief discussion between Isabelle Stengers and Marek]
So what I would like is that the next time, if you will, that Isabelle… There is one point, it’s… There are two points. There is this story about the schema and the possibility of using the notion of convergent series and divergent series to take account of the compossible and the incompossible. That’s point one. And then the other point is the definition I had derived of individuality as condensation of convergent singularities. I maintain this more, I feel much more confident about this. So my dream is that, if you would be so kind, and if Isabelle would be so kind, you and Isabelle would delve a bit into this relation of singularity and individual. Is this possible? Are you here for the next class? If this doesn’t create difficulties for you… Or anything you see about this problem. [Pause, apparent silence] In any case, for the next class, those who will come and wouldn’t again be entirely disgusted, [Laughter] you must review this ending and situate all this readily in your mind because we will really be asking… We have every chance of expecting to share with our friends who know about mathematics some things entirely… that I could not consider all alone. So for us, this will be very, very valuable. [End of the session] [2:45:09]

Lecture 08, 27 January 1987: Principles and Freedom (3) — Tales of the Compossible and the Incompossible; Invited Presentation on Neighborhoods and Singularities
Part 1
We will have to work all the harder today since our session is short because I have some meetings that are indispensable for your future. The meetings start around noon. So this will be a shorter session.
So here’s where we are. The first thing I would like…  We find ourselves faced with three questions, three questions to specify. So we need to specify these so that I am happy. These three questions will serve as our conclusion.
The first question, we saw it the last time, is the notion and the extreme importance of the notion of singularity, and I think that singularity or singular point is a notion of mathematical origin that appeared with the beginnings of the theory of functions. Historians of mathematics correctly consider that the theory of functions is, no doubt, the first great formulation on which what we call modern mathematics depends, the theory of analytical functions. And Leibniz is at the base of this theory of functions. Leibniz’s importance in mathematics is without doubt since, in his mathematical works, he elaborates a theory of function to which there will not be, I don’t say anything more to be developed, but in which there will be very little to change. So it’s a fundamental mathematical act that orients mathematics towards a theory of functions.[2]
And the singular points, or singularities, are the essential instrument of this theory; only Leibniz is not satisfied with being the first great mathematician to develop an entire theory of functions. I am not saying that he invents it since it’s in the seventeenth century that the rudiments of a great theory of functions is sketched out. But not only is Leibniz that [a great mathematician], the concept of singularity is going to be set loose and becomes in his works a philosophical-mathematical concept, and in what sense? In the exact sense in which – generally – we can say: singularities – you would expect a lot of them; we have seen that there are several sorts — and this will be a topic for us, to sort out singularities, in the Leibnizian sense of the term singularity. And in the first sense of the term singularity, what is a singularity for Leibniz? I would say very summarily that a singularity is an inflection, or if you prefer, a point of inflection, and the world is an infinite series of inflections. The world is the infinite series of possible inflections. All of this, we have seen. So my first question-conclusion is: what is a singularity, or what is a singular point, once it’s been said that – generally – we can say that a singularity is an inflection, or that a singularity is there where something happens in a curve?
Thus, from the beginning, our idea of the surface with variable curvature that is the fundamental theme that seemed to us to be Leibniz’s, is inseparable from a technique and from a philosophy of singularities and of singular points. I don’t need to insist, I think, on the novelty of the sense of such a notion, since certainly earlier, logic was familiar with the universal, the general, the particular, the singular. But singularity in the sense of a singular point or what happens has a line, that is something completely new, and in fact, it’s of mathematical origin. Starting at this level, I can then define an event philosophically as an aggregate of singularities. I would say at that moment that the notion is not even only of mathematical origin, but of physical origin. A critical point in physics, evaporization, crystallization, whatever you like, a critical point in physics presents itself as a singularity. All that, you grasp, is already an aggregate of problems, the arrival of this mathematical-physical-philosophical notion, the singular point, so let us give praise to Leibniz.
There you have a first group of questions that, for us, are well brought forth, but you understand that this is material under development and research.
Second question, or second foreshadowing (pressentiment) that we have: perhaps that, between two singularities, there is an entirely original type of rapport, and a logic of the event requires that this type of rapport be specified. What is a rapport, and what is the type of rapport between singularities? And the last time, I proposed a hypothesis starting from the following idea, a notion as bizarre as the one that Leibniz introduces in telling us: if you take an aggregate of possibles, they are not necessarily compossibles, so the relation of compossibility and incompossibility would be this type of relation between singularities. “Adam non-sinner” is incompossible with the world in which Adam sinned. Once again, this is what matters, understand well: “Adam non-sinner” is contradictory to “Adam sinner”, but it is not contradictory to the world in which Adam sinned. Simply, between the world in which Adam sinned and the world in which Adam does not sin, there is incompossibility.
So God’s situation when it created the world is very strange, you see, and that belongs to some of the most famous ideas of Leibniz. God’s situation when it created the world is that God finds itself in the situation in which it chooses between an infinity of possible worlds. It chooses between an infinity of equally possible worlds, but that are not compossible with one another. In God’s understanding, there is an infinity of possible worlds, and God is going to choose. Among the possible worlds, which are not compossible with each other, it is going to choose one among them.
Which one? Fortunately we don’t yet have to deal with this question, but it’s easy to guess Leibniz’s response: it [God] is going to choose the best, the best. It is going to choose the best of possible worlds. It can’t choose them all at once, they are incompossible. So it is going to choose the best of possible worlds, a very, very curious idea, but what does the best mean, and how does it choose the best? There has to be some kind of calculus! What will the best of possible worlds be, and how does he choose one? Isn’t Leibniz going to enlist in a long theory of philosophers for whom the superior activity is the game? Only to say that, for many philosophers, the superior or divine activity is the game, which isn’t saying much, because it’s a question of knowing which game we are talking about. And everything changes according to the nature of the game. It is well known that Heraclitus already invoked the game of the child-player, but everything depends on what game he is playing, this child-player. Does Leibniz’s God play the same game as Heraclitus’s child? Will this be the same game that Nietzsche invokes? Is it yet again the same game as Mallarmé’s?
Leibniz will force us to create a theory of games, even not creating a theory of games, something that he found exciting. In the seventeenth century, the great theories of games begin. Leibniz will lend himself to this effort, and I add the following erudite comment: it’s that Leibniz knows the game of “go”, that’s really interesting [Laughter], he knows go, and in a quite astonishing little text, he makes a parallel between go and chess, and he says that, in the end, there are two kinds of games. He doesn’t call it “go”; he says “a Chinese game,” and he says that the great difference between go and chess – and he says something quite correct – chess belongs to games in which it’s a matter of taking. One takes pieces — You see the classification of games outlined here — one doesn’t take pieces in the same way as in chess and checkers, since there are several modes of capture; but these are games of capture. Whereas in go, it’s a question of isolating, of neutralizing, of surrounding, not at all taking, [but] of inactivating.
So I add the “scholarly remark”, that in the editions of Leibniz of the nineteenth century, the game of go is so little known that, in reference to this text by Leibniz, there is a note, for example in the Couturat edition, at the start of the twentieth century, Couturat who is a very good specialist both in mathematics and in Leibniz, there is a note by Couturat about Leibniz’s allusion to this Chinese game. He says that this refers to… He describes a little and says “according to what a China specialist has told us.” So, it’s very curious since according to Couturat’s note, go was not at all known at that time. It’s importation to France is quite recent. Anyway, there I go wasting time. [Laughter] This was just to tell you … to tell you what? Oh right, as a result of what calculus, of what game, did God choose a determinable world as the best. Ok, we will leave that aside because it’s not difficult, the answer isn’t difficult, and for the moment, we are swimming in what’s difficult.
What I’m saying is, what matters to us, and this is my second question, is this: what is the type of relation that allows us to define compossibility and incompossibility? At our last meeting, I was rather forced to say that Leibniz’s texts were somewhat lacking on this topic, but that we had the right to attempt an hypothesis, and the hypothesis that we attempted was the following: couldn’t one say that there is compossibility between two singularities when the prolongation (prolongement) of one into the neighborhood of another gives rise to a convergent series, or on the contrary, for incompssibility, when the series diverge? It’s therefore the convergence and divergence of series that would allow me to define the relation between compossibility and incompossibility. So compossibility and incompossibility would be the direct consequences of the theory of singularities. This is my second problem, and I insisted on this: these are problems. This is the second problem that we were able to derive from our previous meeting.
Third, and final, problem, is that, henceforth, I had at least – a considerable advantage, but we’ll see – I had at least a final hypothesis about this fundamental question for Leibniz: what is individuality or individuation? Why is this a fundamental question for Leibniz? We have already seen it, if it is true that any substance is individual, if it is true that the substance is the individual notion designated by a proper name, you, me, Caesar, Adam, etc. The question “what does individuation consist of ?”, “what individuates substance if all substance is individual?”, becomes fundamental. My answer or my hypothesis was this: can’t we say that the individual, the individual substance, is a condensation, a condensing (condensé) of compossible singularities, that is, convergent? In the end, this would be a definition of the individual; there is nothing more difficult to define than the individual. If we can say this, I would then say, almost, that individuals are singularities of a second type.
What would that mean, a condensing of singularities? For example, I defined Adam the individual through a primary singularity, and I return to the text of the Letters to Arnauld: “first man” ; second singularity, “in the garden” ; third singularity : “having a woman born from his own rib” ; fourth singularity : “having endured a temptation”. You see all kinds of problems : is it the case that in order to define an individual, an infinite number of singularities is required or not ? There we have a problem. Another problem: I can only define the individual as a condensing of singularities if the singularity does not already implicate the individual. About this point, I’m greatly interested. In fact, the singularity does not already implicate the individual. The individual is what? It’s the subject that envelops singularities; it’s the subject that includes singularities. As we’ve seen, it’s the soul. [Pause] But singularities pre-exist the subject, in what sense? A perfect expression exists for us; we will say of singularities that they are pre-individual.
Henceforth, there is no vicious circle, which would be quite vexing, of defining the individual as a condensing of singularities if singularities are pre-individual. “Condensing” (condensé) means what? All sorts of texts by Leibniz tell us and remind us that points have the possibility of coinciding, and it’s even for that reason that points are not constitutive parts of extension. If I have an infinite number of triangles, for example, or of angles, if I have an infinite number of angles, I can cause their vertices to coincide. I would say that “condensing of singularities” means that the singular points coincide. The individual is a point, as Leibniz says, but a metaphysical point; the metaphysical point is the coincidence of an aggregate of singular points. Hence the importance – but this is what we have done since the beginning, but I insist on justifying it perpetually –, it is well understood that Leibniz repeats to us constantly: there are only individual substances. In the end, the only thing real, understand the only thing real are individual substances. [Pause] But that does not prevent… we have seen, and it’s what we have done, we had to begin from the world, that is: we had to begin from inflection. We had to begin from an infinite series of inflections.
It’s only secondarily that we noticed that inflections, and the world itself, exist only in individual substances that express it [world]. But that does not prevent individual substances from resulting from the world, which is what I told you. We had to maintain absolutely the two propositions at once: individual substances are for the world, and the world is in the individual substances. Or, as Leibniz says: God did not create “Adam sinner” – that’s the key text for me since, without this text, everything we have done, the order that we followed in the first trimester, that is, going from the world to the individual substance, would not be valid. — God did not create “Adam sinner”; it created the world in which Adam sinned, once it’s been said that the world in which Adam sinned exists only in individual notions that express it, the notion of Adam and the notions of all of us who live under original sin.
Good… So you see… My third point is this whole sphere of the problem of individuation in which I believe Leibniz, there as well, is the first. If I sum up the three points, I am saying that, among all the fundamental things that Leibniz brings to philosophy, there is first off the eruption of the mathematical-physical-philosophical notion of singularity, to which my problem responds, “but, in the long run, what is a singularity?” because we will never finish with the singularity as constitutive element of events. A logic of the event, a mathematics of the event, it’s a theory of singularities. And, in mathematics, that overlaps with the theory of functions, but we call not only for a theory of functions, but also for a logic of the event.
Second point: the types of relations from one singularity to another, compossibility, incompossibility, convergent series, divergent series, and what are the consequences of all that for the understanding of God, and for the creation of the world, and for the game of God, if God creates, that is, chooses the best of worlds through a kind of calculus or game? Third point: what is individuality if we start from the idea that it condenses a certain number of singularities, or an infinity of singularities, etc., these singularities being, henceforth, necessarily pre-individual?
That makes three tough problems. I would just like – before… here this is quite simple, before calling on those people who are more competent than me – I’d like to draw from this some restful consequences. You see this really curious situation, the compossible, the incompossible. In the understanding of God, an infinity of possible worlds is agitated. There Leibniz plunges in deeply. I apologize to those who were here two years ago; I already spoke about that regarding another matter, regarding the true and the false, and yet it seems that evidently I have to address it again, but I am going to go rather quickly. I am speaking for those who were not here.[3]
There are three fundamental texts that you must consider. The first is quite famous, by Leibniz himself, the Theodicy. In the Theodicy, part 3, paragraphs 413 and after, it’s an eminently Baroque text, to return to our theme. What does one call a Baroque tale? For example, Gérard Genette and other critics considered this, and summarily, they agree in telling us this: at first glance, what characterizes Baroque texts is above all the nesting (emboîtement) of tales one within another, on one hand, and on the other hand, the variation of the relation of narrator and narration, both becoming but one. In each tale nesting into another corresponds, in fact, to a new type of narrator/narration rapport.
If you take, starting from paragraph 413, the very curious tale that Leibniz tells, and which is extremely beautiful – in the Theodicy – you will see that it’s a typically Baroque story since it begins from a dialogue between a Renaissance philosopher named [Laurentius] Valla…[4] , a dialogue between Valla and Antoine [Antonio Glarea] on the theme, “Is God responsible for evil?” And in this dialogue a Roman character is evoked, Sextus, the last king of Rome who exhibited evil passions and, notably, raped Lucretia. Some say that it’s his father who raped Lucretia, ok, but in the tradition to which Leibniz refers, it’s Sextus who raped Lucretia. And the question is: is this God’s fault? Is God responsible for evil?
To this first tale, the dialogue between Valla and Antoine, this first tale nests into a second tale which is Sextus going to consult Apollo, to tell him, but really, Apollo, what is going to happen to me? Then a third tale is juxtaposed to this: Sextus is not satisfied with what Apollo tells him, and he seeks out Jupiter himself. He addresses himself directly to Jupiter to have a first-hand answer. [There are] variations of the tale. There, in the Sextus-Jupiter discussion, there is a new character named Theodorus, the High Priest, loved by Jupiter. And [in] a new tale, it’s Theodorus, observing the dialogue between Sextus and Jupiter, who says to Jupiter: but still, you didn’t answer him very well, to which Jupiter says: Go see my daughter, Pallas. So the last tale nests into the others: Theodorus goes to see Pallas, Jupiter’s daughter. You see that all this creates quite a nest of overlaps. And then! [Deleuze breaks out laughing], Theodorus falls asleep! This is typically Baroque. Baroque novels are just like that. So I cannot believe that Leibniz… He knows perfectly well what he is doing; in this ending of the Theodicy which is entirely crazy, he knows perfectly well what he is doing. It’s a grand Baroque imitation and, once again, he knows it.
So Theodorus falls asleep, but he dreams. He dreams that he speaks to Pallas, and there Pallas tells him: come follow me! It’s not over. She leads him to see a splendid transparent pyramid. This is Theodorus’s dream. It’s the palace of the fates, on which I stand guard, Pallas tells him. She says that Jupiter comes sometimes to visit these sites for the enjoyment of reviewing things and to renew his own choices. God comes to visit this architecture, this transparent architecture. What is this transparent architecture? It’s an immense pyramid, which indeed has a vertex, but that has no end.
You sense immediately that something is coming. This means that, in the infinity of possible worlds, there is indeed a world that is the best, but there aren’t any that are the worst. On the side of the depths, it extends to infinity, but not on the side of the heights. There is a maximum, but there is no minimum. That interests us because one must consider everything mathematically. In the lists of everything that is a singular point, we will see that there is a moment in which arises – not at all for the moment – the idea that there are maxima and minima. I believe the maxima and the minima are not of the same kind in Leibniz. On the level of worlds, there is indeed a world that is the best, but there is no world that would be the worst. There’s a maximum; there is no minimum.
So I have my endless pyramid with its vertex, and way up at the top… but notice that this poses a problem; the text is splendid, I hope you’ll read it, but that poses a problem because how do we organize it, even if I attempt to draw an illustration? I have my pyramid. Way up at the top there is an apartment – “apartment” is the word that Leibniz uses. You recall our stories, the upper floor, the lower floor, all that. You will see all that returning in this admirable text. There is an apartment that culminates at a point; if I understand well, it occupies the whole upper region of the pyramid. And in this apartment, a Sextus lives. Fine. Below, Leibniz tells us, there are other apartments, and here it gets complicated. I consider all these apartments, and it’s not easy; how are they organized? In my view, it’s not possible that there are any with the top below; in other words, grasp this: how to fill a pyramid and with what figures? I would say, what is the figure of the apartments? It’s a problem that mathematicians know well and that’s an exciting problem.
On the simplest level, given a surface… [Interruption of the recording BNF; text from WebDeleuze] [36:14]
Part 2
… how does one divide it in such a way that there is no empty part? More simply, how does one pave a space? The problems of paving are also problems of architecture, but also problems of mathematics. For example, can you pave a circle with circles, or will there be empty parts? Given a surface, with what can you pave it? The tradecraft of a paver seems like nothing big, but it’s one of the most beautiful trades in the world, see? It’s a divine activity, paving. The proof is that [Continuation of the BNF recording] Leibniz, in a famous text entitled “On the radical origin of things,” especially as this book is 15 pages long, [Laughter] and indeed Leibniz explicitly refers to it, paving, regarding the creation of the world by God. That is, he assumes – and this is something he does not believe, but it matters little – he assumes that space is assimilable to a given surface, and he says: God necessarily chooses the world that fills this space the best and to the maximum. In other words, God chooses the world that best paves the space of creation.
So how am I going to pave my pyramid of apartments in such a way that there is no empty space? It’s interesting. One must assume that, if these are little pyramids, no apartment has its point downward, otherwise that doesn’t work at all. — You see, it’s in order to open you to immense problems that I tell you all this. — But then in the lower apartments… each apartment, Leibniz tells us, I’m not sure where, but believe me, each apartment is a world. [Deleuze looks through the text for the quote] No, hmm… Ah, hé, hé, I’ve located the text: “Thereupon the Goddess led Theodorus into one of the halls of the palace: when he was within, it was no longer a hall, it was a world” [Theodicy]. I have the impression that it’s the entryway in Baroque style. You enter into the Baroque room and, at the same time that you enter, it’s no long a room, it’s a world. You have a first apartment in which you have a Sextus, and then you have another apartment, below, there is not a floor sufficiently low, there are always lower floors, but there is a floor that is the highest. So, on the upper floor, you have a Sextus, in the following floors, you have other Sextuses. Consider the problem: why are these Sextuses? That’s going to be a problem for us.
So that’s where it gets complicated, but everything is important in this text which is so delightful (gai) ; he says : each of the Sextuses, in the apartments, has a number on his forehead, a number 3000, 10000, some as it’s infinite from the base, you have a Sextus that has the number 1,000,000. The Sextus in the apartment up above has number 1. Why does he have a number? It’s because at the same time – you recall what I told you, the upper room was a reading chamber, in the Baroque style. In each apartment there is a great volume of writings. [Deleuze reads with great feeling] “Theodorus couldn’t keep from wondering what that meant? Why is there a great volume of writings? It’s the history of this world, Pallas answers. It’s the history of this world that we are visiting right now, the goddess tells him. It’s the book of its fates. You have a number on the forehead of Sextus, look at the spot in this book that it marks. Theodorus looks for it and finds the story of Sextus, the entire story. However, I already saw Sextus in his transparent apartment,” yes indeed! Yes, I saw him, and he was imitating a sequence; for example, he was raping Lucretia, or something more acceptable, he was getting crowned king of Rome. I was noticing that; theater. But it does not include everything. In other words, the entirety of the world to which that Sextus belongs, that is, the entirety of the world with which that Sextus, the one who raped Lucretia and was crowned the king of Rome, with which this Sextus is compossible, I didn’t see him, I read it in the book. You see the combination reading-seeing proper to the Baroque, there as well, what we called the last time the emblem, in saying that the Baroque is emblematic; we find it again here completely.
Let’s return [to the text]. I am wandering. So [there is] the Sextus up on top, good. But below, I see a Sextus who goes to Rome, but renounced being crowned. As Leibniz says, he buys himself a little garden and becomes a rich and respected man. It’s another Sextus, he has a different number on his forehead. I would say: This Sextus number two is incompossible with the apartment on top, with the world above, with the world 1. And then I see a third Sextus, who renounces going to Rome, and goes somewhere else, to Thrace, and he gets crowned king of Thrace. He doesn’t rape Lucretia. Let’s suppose etc. … etc… to infinity. You see all these worlds are possible, but they are incompossible between themselves, which means what ? That means that there is divergence, there is a moment in which it diverges. Why are they all Sextuses? We return to the problem because it’s very important, but one can assume that it’s because a small number of singularities are common to them. All are the sons of Tarquinius, and successors to the king of Rome; but in one case, he does in fact succeed his father, in another case he renounces the succession and leaves Rome, in another case he renounces the succession but stays in Rome. You see that the divergences do not pass from one world to another. The divergences that define incompossibility do not necessarily pass into the same spot. That’s what is very important: I have a network of divergences that do not begin in the same singularity, or that do not begin in the passage of the same singularity with another. You have this extremely joyful tableau of incompossible worlds. An aggregate of compossibility, an aggregate of compossible singularities defining a world, and God chooses, he chooses the best of possible worlds in all this.
So I was saying that, it’s here that very quickly I just want to allude to two fundamental texts, two typically literary Leibnizian texts.[5] One poses no problems since its author is extremely knowledgeable and created a typically Leibnizian version — it’s also very curious, without… but he has no need to cite [Leibniz] — it’s by Borges, Borges, with the title “The Garden of Forking Paths.” You see this possible tale… [Laughter] What’s going on?
Hidenobu Suzuki (seated beside Deleuze): That it’s a brilliant text.
Deleuze: What?
Suzuki: Someone was saying that it’s a brilliant text.
Deleuze: Here, the incompossibility has become, under Borges’s pen, the bifurcation, paths that bifurcate. I’m just reading… You can refer to…  It’s in a volume entitled Fictions, “The Garden of Forking Paths,” [Pause] and I’ll read a passage. He recounts a novel written by a mysterious Chinese writer: “Usually, in all fictions, when a man is faced with alternatives, he chooses one at the expense of the others” — notice that this exactly God’s situation in Leibniz: between incompossible worlds, he chooses one and eliminates the others. — “In the fiction of the almost unfathomable Ts’ui Pên, he chooses all of them simultaneously.” Imagine a perverse Leibnizian God, who would cause to come into existence all the incompossible worlds. What would Leibniz say? Leibniz would say this is impossible! But why is this impossible? Because in that case, God would renounce his favorite principle which is the principle of the best, choosing the best. Supposing a God who cared not all about the best, which is clearly impossible, impossible, but suppose such God, then we slide from Leibniz to Borges. “He thus creates various futures, various times which start others that will in their turn branch out and bifurcate.”[6] From this comes the novel’s contradictions. “Fang, let us say” — it’s a character like Sextus — “has a secret. A stranger knocks at his door. Fang makes up his mind to kill him. Naturally, there are several possible outcomes. Fang can kill the intruder, the intruder can kill Fang, both can be saved, both can die, and so on and so on. In Ts’ui Pên’s work, all the possible solutions occur, each one being the point of departure for other bifurcations.”
I would say that in the understanding of God, it’s exactly the same thing. In the understanding of God, all possible worlds are developed. There is simply a blockage: God only causes to pass into existence one of these worlds. But in his understanding, all the bifurcations are there; this is a vision of the understanding of God that has never been seen. It’s very interesting, but this is how…  I just wanted to state the way in which Borges creates a pure application, an exercise of style, that comes directly from the Theodicy. But what interests me more is this novel that I mentioned and that I wanted you to read, and that is even more Leibnizian, literally Leibnizian. This novel comes from someone that we wouldn’t expect and who reveals himself as a great philosopher, Maurice Leblanc, a great popular novelist of the nineteenth century, well known as the creator of Arsène Lupin. But besides Arsène Lupin, he wrote some admirable novels, and better than the Lupin [novels], and notably one that has been re-edited – it’s marvelous! — in the Livre de poche series, called: La Vie extravagante de Balthazar [Balthazar’s Extravagant Life]. You are going to see the extent to which this is important for us that I will rapidly summarize.
This is a very convoluted novel: Balthazar is the hero, and he’s a young man working as a professor of daily philosophy, and daily philosophy is a very special philosophy, very interesting, that consists of saying: nothing is extraordinary, everything is regular, ordinary. Everything that happens is ordinary; in other words, there are no singularities; that’s quite important. During the novel, all sorts of frightening misfortunes befall Balthazar, and each time, he his pursued by a timid sweetheart named Coloquinte. And Coloquinte tells him: But Monsieur Balthazar, what does the daily philosophy say, because this is not banal what’s happening to us? And Balthazar scolds her saying: Coloquinte, you don’t understand, all that is quite ordinary as well shall soon see. And the singularities dissolve. You recall my entire theme: how do singularities develop? By extending themselves over a series of ordinaries, into the neighborhood of another singularity.
And what carries it along? Do the ordinaries depend on singularities, or do singularities depend on ordinaries? A text by Leibniz that really appeals to me, in the New Essays, and that I quoted the last time, would have us believe that the answer is complex since Leibniz tells us: what’s remarkable (understand: the singularity) must be composed of parts that are not remarkable. What is remarkable must be composed of parts that are not remarkable, in other words, a singularity is composed of ordinaries. What does that mean? I was telling you that it’s not very complicated. Take a figure like the square which has four singularities, its four vertices, anyway its four I don’t know what, its four thingies where that changes direction, its four singular points. I can say A, B, C, and D; I can say that each of these singularities is an ordinary double point since the singularity B is the coincidence of an ordinary that belongs to AB, and another ordinary that belongs to BC. Fine. Should I say that everything is ordinary, even the singularity, or should I say that everything is singular, even the ordinary? Balthazar has chosen the first viewpoint and says: Everything is ordinary, even singularities.[7]
However, some strange things befall Balthazar, since it so happens that he does not know who is father is. And as it happens, he could care less; contrary to the hero of modern novels, Balthazar has no interest in knowing who his father is, [Laughter] but it happens that there is an inheritance problem for which he has to learn it. And Leblanc, the immortal author of this beautiful book, of this great novel, provides three singularities that define Balthazar: he has fingerprints, it’s a singularity since his prints do not resemble those of anyone else. First singularity, his fingerprints. Second singularity, a tattoo that he wears on his chest made of three letters: m Maurice, t Theodore, p Paul, MTP. And a third singularity, a clairvoyant that he visited, despite himself, told him: your father has no head. [Laughter] So Balthazar’s three singularities are: having a headless father, having his very own fingerprints, and having a tattoo as mtp. That corresponds to Adam’s three singularities – being the first man, being in a garden, and having a woman born from his rib. We can start from there.
There follows a whole series of fathers who arrive. First father, the Count de Coucy-Vendôme answers the conditions well since he died by having his throat being cut, by a bandit, the head mostly cut off. Is Balthazar his son? Starting from three given singularities, are they extended out and into the neighborhood of that singularity: being the son of an assassinated Count? No doubt, yes, in one world. In one world, that’s it, that works very well. But from that point, at the moment that Balthazar is going to receive the inheritance of the Count de Coucy, he gets kidnapped by a bandit who tells him:[8] “you are the son our former boss,” who was called Gourneuve. It was a notorious bandit, and not only a notorious bandit, but also the one who cut off the count’s head. So, this second father assassinated the first one, and thus he complicated the network because henceforth, both of them are going to belong to a compossible world, and yet they are going to be incompossible.
But we’re not done, ok? This is a long calculation. But finally Gourneuve has no head; he meets the necessary condition because he lost his head by being guillotined. And he offers a supplementary advantage since, you may have noticed that mtp hasn’t yet been justified, whereas Gourneuve, in the first case, he was the boss of the Mastropieds gang, which is the gang M-T-P, thus justifying the tattoo. [Pause] So, there where we have incompossibility, we cannot have for father both the assassin and the one assassinated. [Laughter] So this is another world, as it diverges. And yet, the two fathers belong to the same compossible world, but at the same time, it’s incompossible.
But there’s no reason for too much concern because at the same time that Balthazar is going to be integrated into the Mastropieds gang, he is kidnapped, kidnapped by an Englishman who takes him to the Far East, where there’s a war, and gives him over to a leader named Revade Pacha. And Revade Pacha tells him, “you are my son; you’re my son. You are Mustapha,” M-T-P, Mustapha. [Laughter] This is a third world. What a great Baroque novel this is, the very example of the Baroque novel, with travel, everything! So… Then, shortly thereafter, Revade Pacha gets decapitated, so everything is there: he too is without head, mtp is justified, all is well.
But at the point when everything is going wrong for Balthazar, here comes a poet named Beaumesnil, and this poet saves him. He says to Balthazar, “you’re my son!” So this is the fourth one. Only Balthazar had stolen something from his previous father, Revade Pacha, taking off with Revade Pacha’s treasury. And so we have the new father, Beaumesnil the poet, who goes mad! That is, he loses his head! [Laughter] He loses his head, and he runs off after stealing the money from his son, [Pause] and crying out, “It’s counted, weighed, divided!” You have all recognized the famous expression, “Mane Thecel Phares”. Mane Thecel Phares is M-T-P, a new world that diverges. So here we have four worlds that are all possible, but at the same time, are incompossible with one another.
So at this point, everything will then be explained to us. Everything here is a swindle. This is the problem: Is the Leibnizian God a swindler? And in this, what I’d like you to understand is that, in fact, Leibniz escapes the critique, but that his God would be a swindler if it were like Borges or like Leblanc. That is, if God caused incompossible worlds to come into existence, there we would really have a fraud.
Fortunately, the Leibnizian God is moral, that is, doesn’t cause these incompossible worlds to come into existence. Why? Because the fraud is the following: a hobo arrives who is the fifth father, a hobo named Vaillant-Dufour. And Vaillant-Dufour had an idea when he was quite young. It was to create a boarding home for rich young boys who were far from their parents. You see? He had a little boarding home for rich boys, four of them, four rich boys as well as his own. So, in fact, he had the count’s son, the bandit’s son, the rich bandit, Revade Pacha’s son, and the poet’s son, as well as his own son. So the boarding home consisted of five children. And then there’s a flood, and only one of the sons survived. And the hobo doesn’t even know which one is his son; he doesn’t know if he survived. And he tells himself, well, this is quite annoying because what can he do to keep the money and keep the families paying? So he creates a document with the fingerprints of the survivor, and he sends it to the four parents saying, “Your son survived; yours is the one that survived.” You see? This isn’t a dumb idea! [Pause] So, at the same time, he doesn’t know, and in the end, is the hobo the real father? Is he the fifth father that would make… and that would unify all the incompossible worlds? Well, not even, because he doesn’t know. He doesn’t know if he’s the father. So, in his own turn, he only belongs to one of the worlds, and he is unable to say it except through fraud. And finally, in the end, he is such an alcoholic that he had also lost his head. [Laughter] So this is fine. Each time there are series, divergent sketches, series, etc. It’s the mystery of incompossible worlds, or as Leibniz says, the ballet of fates.
So, I come back to this. I would like everything to be much more concrete, and I return to my question, or rather my three questions, my three questions being: up to what point could we develop a mathematico-philosophical theory of singular points? Second question: up to what point can we develop the idea of original relation, that is, irreducible to any other type of relation that would unify, positively or negatively, one singularity to another, positively in the case of compossibility or the convergent series, negatively, exclusion from the point of view of divergent singularities, or of divergent series? Third question: is it possible to define the individual as a condensing of convergent singularities, and what is the consequence for the very notion of the individual or for the principle of individuation?
So it’s on this point that, if you allow, [Deleuze speaks to his mathematician colleague, Marek] I would like to ask you if you see some research directions for all of us, for… uhh… ? [Pause]
Marek:[9] I had prepared a presentation based on your last class, but since then, you have bifurcated so much that…
Deleuze: Oh, no, no, no, we can certainly return to earlier points, eh?
Marek: So I will have to bifurcate, and so I am asking you for great indulgence. Let’s say that my presentation is likely to be lateral, in principle, or if it comes back to the center, that will be fine.
I’d like to go back to a notion that is essential, that refers us to another one that we have spoken about on occasion, that you [Deleuze] have spoken about at one time, which is central in my opinion. It’s the notion of singularity. So I would like to say this: singularity, how might we define something of this sort? A possible definition – I approach it as did [René] Thom, but why not? – this would be something that would occur differently than in any possible neighborhood, that is, as if something different suddenly happens from anything occurring all around. I am voluntarily using vague words because, as you will see, there lays the difficulty: how to define the neighborhood (voisinage)? So, singularity refers to neighborhood, that is, refers to the relations between the singular point and everything near it, everything immediate to it. Something different has to happen, however near that it might be. This is perhaps the problem about which mathematicians are the most deeply concerned. Earlier you were giving an utterly striking example of the problematic for mathematicians at the end of the nineteenth century of the problem of singularity.
So, in short, if you will, the singular event must be – perhaps we have to say it this way; sometimes mathematicians say it – isolated, that is, at heart, being different from its neighborhood, and perhaps even it would have to be isolated in space, that is, having no neighborhood, no one in the neighborhood. It’s interesting that you spoke about Borges earlier, etc., because I can cite a perspective of this sort. At bottom, [Henri] Poincaré said that a singularity is a deformation; this is Poincaré’s point of view, and this can be shown rather simply in the example – then, I would like, nonetheless, excuse me, since Leblanc, Maurice Leblanc… — This passage is a bit brutal, — [He goes to the board, perhaps referring to the small passageway between the students] but I would like to remind you precisely why an inflection is a singularity.
Inflections – I am not drawing, but… — An inflection is what would be like this. [Pause, while he moves toward the board] Here’s the inflection, it’s there. Why is this a bifurcation without seeming to be? Because, I want to say, if everything went well, the curve should go like this, that is, it should have behaved here like this, that is, being in a tangent and climbing to the complement, and there, it should have continued like that, without this direction entirely. It’s not an angular bifurcation; it’s not necessarily angular, but as soon as I draw this part, we understand why the inflection is a singularity because, at bottom, suddenly, something happened; the function has moved into another direction. [He sits back down] There’s an example of the notion of bifurcation, that is, Poincaré, at that moment, when the discussion unfolds, that is, at the end of the nineteenth, beginning of the twentieth century, he proposes this idea of singularity and then bifurcation.
So, for singularity to be defined – and here I return to the neighborhood – for singularity to be defined, all that’s around – and here, we suddenly come back to Leblanc – all that’s around would have to be regular, that is, as close as I might be in the area – and there, we see Leibniz return – as close as I might be in the area of the point, that is, in the neighborhood – I am avoiding the term “neighborhood” because it has a very precise mathematical sense; this is why I am using the rather poorly chosen term “in the area”, which isn’t very clear, because the term “neighborhood” does not have a similar sense; in the end, it has a precise definition. So, all around there must be a certain regularity, and this is perhaps anecdotic, but it nonetheless is perhaps fundamental. One of the ideas that bothered mathematicians a lot at the end of the nineteenth century, is: could there be a system in which there are only singularities, and how would we recognize such a system? That is, can we describe a situation in which, at bottom, all the points are singular, and how would they be singular definitively if they are themselves alongside a thing that is itself singular? Logically, my definition doesn’t work well because singularity, meaning having a different behavior from what’s happening all around, provided that the behavior of what’s happening all around is itself regular. If it’s not, we are in a strange singularity.
So one of the examples, one of the greatest creators of strange objects in this period, has to be [Georg] Cantor, to whom we can render…  He is the one who produced a singular object, around singulars, and at the same time maintaining certain regularities. I am describing for you what is called Cantor’s discontinuum; it’s a strange aggregate, but that’s quite interesting. The system is very simple, so I can describe it to you. Now, as for analyzing it more closely, unfortunately it’s a bit difficult technically. But by thinking about this, you can perhaps imagine some aspects.
The technique is simple. Cantor takes a segment, [He returns to the board] he divides it into three, and he takes out the central part. It remains two pieces, dividing it into three, and taking out the central part. That’s continued indefinitely. Each time, the central part is removed. In the holes, the space, one does surgery… as Deleuze said, and at that point, one obtains a set that, at the limit of this infinite production of singularities, all the edges become singular points, everything that is on the edge of a hole. At the end of this technique, what remains is this when one follows this procedure indefinitely. It’s that all the points are singular, and they are at the edge of a regularity because each one is located at the edge of something. The points remains; in some ways, they are all potentially singular. That is, we obtain a kind of situation of singular points at the edge of regular points, and in fact, they are all singular because at every instant they will become so at each instant along the edge of something. The complete pieces of this system are more complex. We’re forced to pursue a small technical presentation, so if you will excuse me, I couldn’t do so because… [He doesn’t complete the sentence]
Cantor’s discontinuum leaves one perplexed (fait rêver). There followed another entirely astonishing example of regularities and singularities that is quite strange, and that cannot be completely described either. It’s a curve known as the Peano curve, but there are two or three examples. The Peano curve is an entirely classic curve; it’s continuous. It’s drawn inside a square, but if you draw it all the way to the end, it entirely fills the square. That is, in some ways, if you try to draw it, one obtains the following thing, at bottom, some kinds of arabesques which, if pushed all the way to the end, fill the whole square.
Deleuze: But that’s the same thing as Mandelbrot.
Marek: Yes, Mandelbrot made use of that. At the moment when the Peano curve was published, around the year 1900, at that moment, this is the central problem of the singularity in the world of singularities.
Isabelle Stengers: [A barely audible comment, regarding the introduction of a text by Jean Perrin, The Atoms, that Mandelbrot will quite][10]
Deleuze: He even says – so we’re going to be finishing for each other, [Laughter] which is great, it’s so Leibnizian what you are saying that it’s astonishing. That gives Leibniz such a presence in modern mathematics – that before the Perrin text that Isabelle mentioned, the words are “infinitely cavernous” or “spongy”. He says that matter is not at all continuous, the new vocabulary of discontinuity. We can always create holes, and it’s the idea of an infinitely cavernous form, it’s the same thing as the curve of “corles”, infinitely cavernous, infinitely spongy. So he takes “corles” as an example, like charcoal. In fact, for those who are interested in this, this is in a book by Mandelbrot, published by Flammarion, called L’objet fractal [The Fractal Object]. And Mandelbrot has a long quote from a text by Perrin, who is a great physicist and starts off from this quotation.
Marek: I’d like to go back a bit. That is, let’s leave aside momentarily these objects, these singular points that would themselves be immediate neighbors of points [that are] themselves singular. Let’s place ourselves momentarily in the good situation that is a bit like the one you were describing in the last class. That is, the singular point is surrounded by regular points; if all goes well, an event is isolated – the word “isolated” in fact belongs to math vocabulary, but its interpretation is entirely simple, as able to be situated precisely. However, we still have a problem in this case that we have to consider. It’s this: how are the neighborhoods of a singular point constructed? So this refers us to the heart of the notion of neighborhood, of what happens immediately after, that is, to the heart – and here, we must refer to the Leibniz of differential calculus, that is, to the notion of the infinite – because you inevitably notice as well that in the past classes Deleuze as well as me, by the examples I am going to provide, we always necessarily use a measured procedure, such as Deleuze the last time alluding to convergent and divergent series going from one singularity to the other – the notion of series refers us to the infinite in a certain sense. That is, it’s not a question of making [inaudible], but of speaking about what is infinite in this area (alentour). Later we will try to give a definition of what Deleuze has used for quite some time, in any case, he used it in his own way, the notion of convergent series and divergent series, around or toward or between singularities. For the moment, we are staying with the area (alentour).
So, the principal adventure is what to do, how, and why, and under what form do we need the infinite? So if you allow me, I am going… This is how I have a little… I think that this will be clearer and easier. I am going to move us very quickly through time and reach 1934 and then return to Leibniz afterwards, because the adventure that is to unfold begins in 1934 and will end with Leibniz like a flashback.
At the start of the… In the first decade of the twentieth century, there was a mathematician – this is an adventure that everyone know, but I am going to recount it very quickly so that there won’t be any problems – there was this kind of axiomatizing fever – for a pile of reasons that are historical and that are based on the crisis of geometry and on a series of events like that – there was a terrible axiomatizing fever. That is, people wanted to axiomatize theories. Axiomatizing meant giving the fundamental, indispensable rules allowing one theory or another to be built… [Interruption of the recording] [1:22:51]
Part 3
… that is, whole numbers. Of course, let’s be clear, people knew for a long time how to count, that is, in a daily basis, they didn’t axiomatize a theory – in the end, we already have… Look closely at the situation as it unfolds: there is a universe that is, for example, a universe of numbers. They already know how to use them, they’ve known how to count for twenty-five centuries — and Bourbaki claimed there were even mor — so they knew counting, they knew lots of things in arithmetic, and in 1910, they axiomatize. The axiomatization of geometry dates from 1890 when they already were able to draw and teach courses of geometry. Thus, axiomatizing is giving rules to the set allowing defining to happen in an explicit way what one needs. We’ll see later an entirely surprising theory from Leibniz.
So then, there is this long, long work of axiomatization. It’s a complex problem – in the end, everyone who knows the history of math knows about all this work that unfolds very, very precisely and that arrive at 1930 or 1932 with a book by [David] Hilbert, that is Grundlagen der Mathematik [1928] which is the great axiomatization of the set, the same edifice at that moment as the one [inaudible]. At that time, a mathematician named [Thoralf] Skolem posited an astounding problem; he says… he sets forth the inverse problem. If you will, I will recount this as an anecdote.
Imagine that you have axiomatized a theory and that a Martian arrives, who knows nothing of this theory, nor about axiomatization – we are assuming it’s a Martian or any other extraterrestrial knowing how to read. So he’s going to follow what you say within the axiomatic; he’s going to apply it and regularize it. He’s going to apply them (rules), entirely regularly. He knows how to read, and he knows how that functions, and suddenly he is going to engender, he must engender the model that you’ve axiomatized from the start, that is, he must uncover – perhaps… let’s say, let’s do this experience because [Thoralf] Skolem did it. His article is all about this point. Let’s imagine that we have the axiomatization of arithmetic, that is, we have all the axioms of arithmetic. Little by little, the extraterrestrial in questions, who know how to read this axiomatization, is going to create some numbers. Perhaps he will give them different name than those you are used to giving them in your language. But after all, this is not upsetting because from one individual to the other on earth, we already give them different names. But counting in English, Arabic, or in Chinese, or in French, never caused problems; the two sets of numbers, belonging to the Chinese, Arabs, etc. are isomorphic, as mathematicians say. They have the same forms, and they have the same composers. So, they differ only by their names, and this is what happens in their universe.
But Skolem posits the following problem: doesn’t he [the extraterrestrial] risk finding another universe of numbers, one that is completely different and that obeys the same axiomatic? And so, you imagine the strange result of this order; this is effectively what Skolem shows in this 1934 article I mentioned. He shows that he can find many other systems of numbers that are not at all similar to the preceding one, to those with which they were familiar. He pushes this undertaking further by showing that we cannot axiomatize a set like that of numbers in such a way that the model obtained might always be the one that we thought of previously. Logicians use an expression; they say that a system of axioms that would only produce a single model is a categorical system of axioms, and a system of axioms that would not always produce the same model is isomorphic, so Skolem demonstrates in this article that it’s not possible to create a categorical axiomatization.
And here we are going to see the problem of finite and infinite appear in a strict way because we are thinking of, and what Skolem describes, is the following situation: if the model from which you started in order to axiomatize was itself infinite, there is no categorical axiomatization. There is categorical axiomatization only if the starting model is a finite model, and at that moment, the axiomatization is not at all a learned operation. It comes down to naming persons, that is, it says, I would only receive this person, Mr. So, and Mr. Such, and Mr. So, and at that point, it’s not an axiomatization, but rather an entirely simple restrictive rule. And most of the time, the world of which we’re speaking and the world of singularities and neighborhoods, is a necessarily infinite world, thus not axiomatizable, in any case, not axiomatizable in a categorical way.
So, where is the problem? You are going to see why Leibniz is going to come back into this story. Skolem says this definitively: it’s that in the model that my extraterrestrial will have produced, what happens, and that I cannot prevent him from doing in the axiomatic? It’s that outside of numbers – call them (in French), zéro, un, deux, trois, quatre, cinq, etc., that you know – he can introduce some new ones, others, that obey the same rules as ordinary arithmetic. Of course – here I am situating this precisely because you will yet see that it’s important; excuse me for making this a bit technical – of course, there is one of the Peano axioms that says that zero is a number that has no predecessors, so it’s the first among numbers. Then, obviously, since there’s an axiom that says that, my extraterrestrial cannot create a new first number. He is entirely forced to take the same one as us. Only, the new numbers, if he wants to, he can place them after all the others – not after zero since there will be 1, not after 1 since there will be [inaudible] than us, but he can place one of them quite far, and nothing in the axiomatic forbids him doing this and nothing can state that he is forbidden from introducing a new number because imagine what would happen: in order to introduce a new number, you would have to know an axiom saying, “I forbid having any number entered from outside the ones that I stating and these are the following.” And how would you state them since there is an infinity? You are incapable of stating them.
You therefore see why: if the number is infinite, you cannot make axioms that forbid numbers, foreign ones. And what is going to happen is this: imagine how my extraterrestrial, by placing one more of them, this 1 is going to have successors, and is going to have predecessors; nothing forbids it, to the contrary. The axiomatic allows him to do this, and he is going to proliferate [numbers], and there will be 1 double, 1 triple, and so on. Why try to prevent him doing so? It’s going to proliferate. Consequently, at that point we will see numbers appear that are larger than all the numbers that we already know, and these numbers that are larger than the ones we already know, these will already by infinite numbers. But careful: it’s not at all a question – for those thinking there might be a misunderstanding – it’s not at all a question of Cantor’s infinites; it’s an entirely different problematic. It’s a question of numbers that have the same arithmetic properties as everyone. That means that it’s where we are, we stay in the universe of arithmetic, and there will be evens, there will be odds, after an even, there’s an odd, after an odd, there’s an even, etc. etc. So here we are in a universe in which there are new numbers that are larger than all others – let’s call them infinite in quotes – but that are whole numbers like everyone. Later we will see – I will tell you about the text because it interests me greatly – you will see that the first one who had the idea was Leibniz, textually, [several inaudible words].
So we will be in an entirely proliferating universe, but one that we cannot forbid, that can be very vast, or quite reduced. That will depend on my extraterrestrial and his desire, etc. So there we have something that we can construct which is – logicians call it this way, but the notion is quite simple to understand – an extension of the set of whole numbers (entiers); [Sounds of cassettes being changed in several recorders]; so it’s a vaster set in which obviously one can discover [unclear word] of whole numbers, and this extension itself is going to include a certain number of numbers, in the most banal sense of the term, but that have the property of being infinite like [inaudible].
So there is the first article, the one by Skolem. From that point onward and into the 1960s, an American mathematician by the name of Abraham Robinson, who died in 1974, tells himself: couldn’t we do the same thing, not only on the wholes numbers (entiers) because the properties described by Skolem never cease being equally applied in real numbers, that is, in numbers that you know, that is, the total set. In mathematics, we call these real numbers, that is, the set of all there are, decimal numbers, rational numbers, irrationals, etc., the complete set of numbers. The work is relatively delicate because the theory of real numbers is an axiomatic a bit more complicated, as you might suspect, than the axiomatic of whole numbers, — and we’ll be coming back to this later — but Robinson does the work and shows that it’s possible. At that point, we are going to obtain a set of numbers in which there will be infinite numbers as in arithmetic; there will be their inverses that will be infinitely small insofar as they are numbers this time. That is, these are not infinitely smalls as I was using the term earlier for the series. These are infinitely small insofar as they are… they become very small; these are not infinitely small limits, as mathematics is used to designate them. These are veritable numbers that are infinitely small perhaps quite simply because these are the “un-sure” inverses, an infinitely large, an infinite in quotes. So if you take an infinite in quotes, you are going to have, by taking its inverse, a number that will be smaller than all others.
Faced with this difficulty, if you will, of this extension, a name was needed for these old numbers. So Skolem found the name “standard”. We call standard the usual numbers, and we call the others “non-standard”. “Non-standard” has such a vague interpretation in English that perhaps you’ll allow me this [gap]. So this theory will be called – so it’s developed around the 1960s – this theory will be called “non-standard analysis.” You should recall a point that I said in passing earlier, but that’s entirely fundamental. It’s that this new universe with the infinitely large and the infinitely small strictly respects all the axioms and all the rules of the traditional real set. That is, every theorem that has been demonstrated in the set of real [numbers] is a theorem in this new universe. We push farther by showing – but this is a tiny bit more complicated a problem – that this extension is conservative. That is, everything that can be shown in this new universe is equally true in the limited universe. Currently, mathematicians are considering a special little case, a theorem that Robinson was to prove about this extended universe in the 1970s. We ought to be able to find a proof in this limited universe. It’s a theorem – here I give a small anecdote – that up to now has not been found, which is somewhat embarrassing. In the end, theoretically, that should be possible. This theorem known as Bernstein-Robinson for the moment has no equivalent, at least so far, no equivalent yet in the real universe.
So, if you will, now I am going to come back to Leibniz. Here we are facing a new universe in which, without any new incoherence, we have a language in which there are infinites, infinitely smalls that behave like numbers and have exactly the same properties as them without any differences, that is, we are going to be able to define and say what needs to be said in these universes that are vast universes. [Pause] And it’s here that Robinson realizes that in the end, this is Leibniz’s idea, one that he had. In the final chapter of his book – because I believe that this construction is written in a book published in 1966 in Amsterdam called Nonstandard Analysis – in the final chapter of his book, chapter 10, Robinson comes to cite the reference of origin, and at bottom, he cites Leibniz’s theory of infinitesimals. Because this might be of interest, I point out that a short while ago at Blanchard press, there appeared the entire collection of Leibniz’s works on the calculus of infinitesimals. So I am going to be returning to Leibniz shortly, and will do so almost right now. But Robinson cites this letter, from 1701, no, a report (mémoire) by Leibniz dealing with his feelings about differential calculus. It’s a report that he wrote in 1701, that is, rather late in his life, and later I will tell you why I’m insisting on that fact that it’s so late. And Leibniz writes, the text is in French; he’s cited in French in the book:
“There is no need to take the infinite here rigorously, but only as when we say in optics that the sun rays come from a point infinitely distant, and thus are regarded as parallel. And when there are more degrees of infinity, or infinitely small, it is as the sphere of the earth is regarded as a point in respect to the distance [of the sphere] of the fixed stars, and a ball which we hold in the hand is also a point in comparison with the semi-diameter of the sphere of the earth. And then the distance to the fixed stars is infinitely infinite or an infinity of the infinite in relation to the diameter of the ball. For in place of the infinite or the infinitely small, we can take quantities as great and as small as necessary in order that the error will be less than any given error. In this way, we only differ from the style of Archimedes in the expressions which are more direct in our Method and better adapted to the art of inventing.”[11] [Pause]
A little bit farther on, in another text, no, in the same one: “And it happens that the rules of the finite succeed in the infinite as if there were atoms, although there are none at all, matter actually being subdivided without end; and that vice versa, the rules of the infinite succeed in the finite as if there were infinitely small metaphysics, although there need be none; and that the division of matter never achieves infinitely small parcels: this is because everything is governed by reason and, were it otherwise, there would be no science nor rules, which would not at all conform with the nature of the sovereign principle.” Same text by Leibniz.[12]
Finally, I will quote for you a final statement from Leibniz, as I will come back to this passage. It’s a letter from Leibniz to Varignon, in 1702: “Between you and me, I believe that Monsieur de Fontenelle, who is of a courteous and beautiful spirit, wanted to make fun of us when he said that he wanted to make elements of metaphysics out of our calculus. To speak frankly, I am not so persuaded myself that one must consider our infinites and infinitely small other than as ideal things and as well-founded fictions. [While] I believe that there is no creature beneath which there would be an infinity of creatures, I don’t at all believe that there would be, nor even that there could be any infinitely small, and this is what I believe myself able to prove.”[13]
Notice that Leibniz is uncomfortable in this text. This is why I insist on the fact that these texts come from the end of Leibniz’s life. In Leibniz’s first texts on differential calculus, at heart Leibniz thinks that it is possible for there to be some infinitely smalls in a strict sense. You know that differential calculus had been invented almost simultaneously by Newton and Leibniz – I won’t insist on this, but it was perhaps Newton who did so a bit earlier — but the two presentations are, let us say, they entered however into a long dispute that didn’t unfold very elegantly. Outside the matter of primacy [who invented first] which is secondary, what is interesting to note from a strict viewpoint is that when he presents differential calculus, Leibniz would like… he seems to say, his vocabulary is different, that there are infinitely small objects, infinitely small meaning smaller than any assignable finitude – it’s in this way that he defines it – and these infinitely small objects are useable because they function as functional numbers. These are some infinitely small that can be used clearly. Earlier I wanted to present another quote from the same report. Newton has a more complex presentation because he uses alternatively sometimes a language in which he suggested there are some infinitely small, sometimes a language in which he says that this is a limit, or sometimes a language that is closer to the classical description.
In the universe of mathematicians, in 1790 as in 1987, the reaction is the same, that is, introducing new numbers is very disturbing, and mathematicians pretend they might be somewhat sympathetic, and yet even with Robinson’s work, they feel uncomfortable. As an example, I will cite a talk by an entirely well-established mathematician called [Jean] Dieudonné, in a talk from 1980 or 1982 more or less, in which he says that introducing new numbers results in making mathematics empty and insignificant. And Dieudonné was a founder of the Bourbaki group. In passing, I point out that another Bourbaki member, Claude Chevalley – a former professor in this very university – wrote in a text saying that, at heart, doing a kind mathematics, a bit like [René] Thom, doing an absolutely rigorous kind of mathematics is to make it insignificant. I was able to ask Chevalley about his ideal viewpoint, the opposite of the text I was discussing earlier.
The central question… At that time, Leibniz encounters the same difficulty; that is, to say that there could be some infinitely small as object and they would obey the same modes of calculus, the same approaches, as the other numbers appeared quite unacceptable. And thus there immediately was a polemic. This is the allusion he made to Fontenelle; this is even an allusion to the Marquis de l’Hôpital shortly thereafter who had been rather won over by the infinitely small.[14] So, in this 1702 text, Leibniz says, I am returning to this; it’s a polemical position, one that is a retort, “[one must say] I am not so persuaded myself that one must consider our infinites and infinitely small other than as ideal things and as well founded fictions.” But outside of his doubts, Leibniz continues to defend his idea of infinitely small because it’s the only way to speak about neighborhood. And here, I return to the [inaudible] comment.
What has Robinson proven? Quite simply that this idea is not logically incoherent, that there is no possible contradiction between it and the current idea of real-ism. At bottom, he simply did this – and I believe this to be the essential point of this work – it’s to have shown – so I am speaking of a series of projects – that we can have a language including these objects, these “well founded fictions” as Leibniz says, and that causes absolutely no contradiction. That version of infinitesimal calculus has never gained prominence. In his book Nonstandard Analysis, in its central chapters, Robinson presents a veritable course on mathematics, that is, he describes what would be the description of a course on ordinary analysis in the other universe. There is a point that is entirely appealing in this text; it’s that all notions become perfectly simple thanks to the infinitely small. For example, if some among you have ever had to suffer through the definition of a derivative, read it in Robinson, and you will understand it completely. You will wonder how it was that you didn’t understand it before. This is a notion that becomes immediately simple in this [other] universe because instead of having – you remember the derivative perhaps in secondary school. […][15] This definition will take centuries to arrive. Creating a relatively precise definition in terms of limits will take centuries to arrive. And since Deleuze mentioned him the last time, I point out that the edifice is crowned by Weierstrass, a mathematician who is to create a very complex definition of hard angles.
If we have the infinitely small, then the definition of the derivative, of the limit, of a convergent series, all that is quite simple. What would happen then? Quite simply this: every point is found to be surrounded by a zone of infinitely small situated infinitely close to it, in the sense of infinitely small. That is, it will be situated with, all around it, a small halo, a small cloud, and this cloud surrounding it is formed by those that are infinitely close to it. To this set “point plus its surrounding little cloud”, Robinson will give the name “monad”. And at bottom – and reading Robinson’s text shows this very well, and everything done afterward because there were works obviously based on Nonstandard Analysis… — Reading this text show this: that the relations of a point and what surrounds it is a relation of this monad with the universe that surrounds it. I will later give an example that, in my view, goes in the direction of what Deleuze was saying. [Pause]
The monad therefore is a universe formed of points and of that which is infinitely small for it. This requires logically that we undertake a somewhat complex little task of defining equality. We can no longer have in a theory of this kind, in a universe of this kind, a sole notion of equality, as there was in the classical universe. That is, we could have two definitions of equality when it’s strictly the same object or when these are two objects that differ by an infinitely small. Notice that this example is not prohibited from classical mathematics, right? I would point out in passing that without any risk, we can write – I will write this out; it will be easier for you to see – A = 0.99999 … because there is no difference between 0.9999 – if you take my elliptical points out to the end – and 1; the two numbers do not differ at all. These are two ways to write out the same number. One is presented as an infinite approach, that is, if you are lazy and you stop writing the nines at some point, the equality is false. But if you follow this through to the end, it’s the same number. Thus, even in the matter of equality, we have a problem. So obviously, in the Leibnizian universe of the infinitely small, one has to distinguish between the two universes. In that universe – I’d like to answer your question – to say in passing that Leibniz gives an example of the same thing that I do, in the same text cited earlier from 1702.
I would now like to describe in that case what the notion of convergent series can be. So I am choosing only one example in this description, that is, I am rather quickly going to draw a parallel between the notion of convergent series in the classical mathematical universe and the notion of convergent series in the universe of the infinitely small. A convergent series is what? A series of triangles tending – or rather, Deleuze often uses the term “convergent series”, even in Logic of Sense long ago; I think that for mathematicians, it would be more correct to say “convergent succession,” (suite convergente) but in that case, it’s not at all serious, not at all serious. Let us call it “series” if you will.
This is a series the terms of which are going to come close to a given point; that is, we will have a point – that I draw like this – that will probably be outside the series, but the series will come close to it. What does “come close to” mean? Here I am speaking in classical terms. In classical terms, “to come close to” means that each time that I situate a circle near the series, there is an intimacy of terms in the circle and finite number of terms that are outside it. If I take a still smaller circle, there will be more of them there [He points to the drawing] than for the rest, that is, there will be an infinity. That’s what the idea of converging is, that is, if you will, coming close indefinitely, or as the mathematical treatises said at the start of the [twentieth] century, being as close to the limit as one would like. When we read these texts, they always perplexed mathematicians: who is this “one”, what does it “want”? Anyway, this is parenthetical. But in the end, within the doxa of the old treatises, it was written that one goes as close to the limit as one would like. That means, as close to the limit as the circle that I indicated. This is how Weierstrass sums up the problem by making smaller and smaller circles, by showing that the series is convergent if there are an infinite number of terms in the circle and a finite number of terms outside. This is the rather complex definition, you see, because it requires that we create circles. The solution is not a choice; I draw it for you here: it states that each time that you will provide a circle, I would find an infinite number of points in the circle if it’s convergent, and a finite number outside the circle. So, the solution that Weierstrass proposes is [He cites a formula], that can be found.
So let’s now place ourselves in the Leibnizian universe of the infinitely small. The convergent series is one that crashes, that enters at one moment into Leibniz’s monad, that is, whose difference of terms with the limits will become infinitely small at a certain moment and at the end of a finite number of steps, and thus it enters at that moment into the monad. This doesn’t mean that it is then… [He does not complete the sentence] At that moment, I have a tool to describe this hole, it’s the monad, this kind of reflection of the universe around this point. That is, at bottom, there is going to be – and here we see the relation between finite and infinitely small, between infinity and infinitely small – at bottom, the monad is a kind of reflection of the outside universe, at the interior of the area (alentour) around the point, and if this is a singularity, around the center. Robinson demonstrates in fact – it’s quite astonishing, he was answering the question that Deleuze asked at the last class. He shows that there is only one case in which this procedure would not work: it’s if the point in question is isolated, because if it is isolated, I mean that there is no one around it, the monad would be reduced to itself, and this is an entirely special case.
Deleuze: Leibniz said this before.
Marek: Leibniz said it as well. It’s a theorem, if you will, in Robinson’s book. So, if you will, here is what that universe would yield. This description is rather odd because in reading the books, if one were doing a math course, these very examples, these notions would seems really simple because we have a set of words in able to speak of the limit. And this idea that is found in Leibniz’s 1701 report, that is, when he says it’s an ideal set, it’s a “well founded fiction,” I would say that I almost want to say that he didn’t show that it was well founded, but the proof would take a lot of time. In any case, an idea is located there. This whole 1701 report, which is called – it’s in the book published with Blanchard – “A report by Monsieur Leibniz stating his feelings on differential calculus” is there in the Guérard edition, page 350.
Deleuze: In the mathematical [works]?
Marek: Yes, and there one finds a French translation. In fact, it’s written in French. We would have to read in depth the whole of this construction.
So, to close, I want to mention something: that in history, before Leibniz, there was only one mathematician who came close to this idea. This mathematician – it’s not at random since Leibniz cites him in his text – is Archimedes. And Archimedes, with extreme care as well, came to this idea, but I almost want to say, he did so in a negative way. That is, at the moment he came toward it, he rejects it, quite clearly. So I want to close by speaking about Archimedes. Where can we situate this rejection? In one of Archimedes’s texts concerning the calculation of lengths, of volume, and of surface. He found himself faced with this situation: if you take a small line and you add a point, do you increase the line’s length? Let’s take that differently: if you were given some points, could you make a line with them? The answer is no; in any case, Archimedes’s answer is no. That is, the infinitely small cannot create a line of infinitely small points. Just as in stacking up lines one beside the other, you cannot obtain surfaces; something will always be missing. There will be holes all the time; there will be singularities all the time. For example if you were given some segments and you had to make a square, a triangle, I don’t know, by stacking them… Just as with surfaces, you couldn’t create volumes. In saying this, I am almost quoting Archimedes textually because he takes up the three examples one after another. Consequently, he collides with a difficulty that is: what does one do to stack up points to create lines? And he decides to adopt the position to reject this, that it cannot be done. With points, one cannot obtain lines, Archimedes says textually; with lines, one doesn’t get surfaces, and with surfaces, one doesn’t get volumes. He insists on this, repeating it several times.
What would we do then with the infinitely small, well, provided that we also have infinites, if we have infinites, that is, if I can grasp an infinity? So the fiction is located at both ends in order for that to continue. I have to be able to grasp an infinity of infinitely smalls in order to locate a classically standard object. And all through the text, Leibniz indeed senses this difficulty because each time there is an imbalance of infinitely smalls. And I believe that one of the ideas that would be acceptable (tenable) is what Robinson calls the monad around a point – and this will be interesting to see at the level of the singularity. It seems to me, this is what happens, it’s that this idea governs the relations between the singular point and everything that’s around it. The example of the convergent series is entirely indicative. That this would be a divergent series – I am going to close with this – that would be a series that doesn’t enter into the monad, the monad in Robinson’s sense. So there we are. I’d like to take questions… I don’t know if what I said is very lateral.
Deleuze: Oh, not at all, not at all. So this, I find this magnificent. I find it magnificent for us because of all that it brings to us. You understand, I am picking up on one of the topics he discussed: here we have a modern mathematician who is led to use mathematically the notion of the monad. So that enlightens me as well because, well, he belongs to your department, Gilles Châtelet never stops his mathematical work, in which he needs the notion of monad, that is, a disciple of Robinson. And what interests me is the mathematical definition of the monad in Leibniz. And he tells us, if I followed correctly, the monad is formed by singular points with what happens around, once it’s said – with what you called the “cloud” around – once it’s said that the “cloud” and “around” are strictly defined mathematically. So if I’m told and if I learn that it’s a mathematical notion and that there is an actual value there, notice immediately what I have there: I say, such mathematical monads are precisely individuals because the definition – I don’t know if you are feeling this – coincides completely with what I wanted to say: a condensing of singular, prolongable points, that is, with life around, defined by the prolongation in all directions, this is exactly Robinson’s definition. I didn’t know about it, but this a pure joy.[16]
So I would almost say, no, for me, this is a presentation with extraordinary richness that you have generously offered thanks to all that you have taught us. I would just like to come back to one point, the only point where I would have problems after having listened closely. It’s the point on what you were saying about Leibniz’s texts around 1700 because – I’m opening a parenthesis before moving quickly to this point – you show very well that in Skolem, infinite numbers submit exactly to the same rules, that is, the axiomatic. So you say, especially one must not confuse them with the transfinites, if I understand this well.
Marek: That’s right.
Deleuze: One must especially not confuse them with Cantor’s transfinites, because the transfinites don’t belong to the same axiomatic as… That’s it, right?
Marek: Yes.
Deleuze: So the numbers, didn’t he have a special name to prevent confusion? He says infinite numbers.
Marek: He says nonstandard infinite numbers.
Deleuze: Ah yes, there’s nonstandard. I didn’t know about that. How do you spell Skolem. [Marek spells it out for Deleuze] What years was he writing?
Marek: His writings are especially from around 1924. As an aside, the same year I mentioned, one I didn’t discuss, he’s an author of a paradox, known as Skolem’s paradox …
Deleuze: Ah, I don’t know about that.
Marek: … that is really astonishing because one of the ideas located in Skolem’s article, it’s to tell himself – you remember earlier I said that an extraterrestrial could have learned arithmetic; so obviously, the mathematical model that we have in our head – 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 – is smaller because what I’ve said, the extraterrestrial can extend this system. So one of the responses that have been given by Skolem is: yes, fine, but the model we have in our head is always the smallest, and there where the system is paradoxical – and this is what’s called Skolem’s paradox – is that if an extraterrestrial were given the axiomatic of set theory, the model he would create would not be the smallest. The model he would create can be smaller than the one we have in our heads. That is, there is the smaller model than the one we know, [Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes] that is, in the end, there are models, I would go even farther, there are non-countable models that contain non-countable sets, it’s what we currently call the minimal model. So this is paradoxical, it’s paradoxical; the solution to Skolem’s paradox is not simple. In passing, I will suggest that in the book La théorie axiomatique des ensembles, Jean-Louis Krivine – who is writing, it seems a very, very beautiful book[17] – resolves Skolem’s paradox with a pirouette.
Deleuze: What language does Skolem write in?
Marek: Skolem writes in German. The 1934 article is in German, but he is Scandanavian [Norwegian].
Deleuze: So concerning the texts from around 1700, I’d like to present things like this. The texts you referred to, Leibniz constantly says, or seems to say: you know, one must not exaggerate, especially against Fontenelle. The question is not of knowing if the infinitely small exist or not. The question is by what mode of calculation the infinites work, function. [End of the recording; Deleuze may well continue his response] [2:09:18]


Lecture 9, 3 February 1987: Monads and Singularities
Part 1
… You see, I am speaking of the genus animal, species man, sub-species, umm, blond man … [Jump in the recording] This is even worse, but there, the translation is good, so for those who might be interested… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
Fine, so let’s continue. [A student speaks to Deleuze] Ah, the vacation. This is our last session of the semester, fortunately. The return date will be… [Pause] ah, la, la… [Deleuze indicates a nearby student] Ah, he comes from a country that has no vacations. [Laughter]
The student (possibly Hidenobu Suzuki): That’s the reason why I left it, you know?
Deleuze: … Ah yes, he left this country without vacations and where they kill off the elderly [Laughter] in order to attend a class with an old man who asks for nothing more than vacations! [Laughter]
A student: I heard that “senior citizens” in Japan have been asked to leave for Spain…
Deleuze: Yes? Yes, yes, yes, they already want to put them on a far away island, and with a volcano, if possible. [Laughter] Awful. So yes, I wonder what will be done fairly soon with me. [Laughter]
After these happy pleasantries, I am now saying that vacation starts this evening, as usual – it’s always after our class – so from February 3, from the third to, I don’t recall, to the 22, that is, class meets again on Tuesday, February 24. But during the vacation, you will have lots to do. For here is what’s happened: following the previous session in which I told you how much I was struck by Marek’s presentation, there have been some developments, specifically that Isabelle Stengers, who couldn’t be here today, sent a letter to me in which she brings up quite a few things on the problems of prolongation, prolongation starting from a singularity, in which she attempts to distinguish several cases, and that seems very interesting to me. This suits me well because, in fact, we have only laid out the start of an outline of a theory of singularities. So, we haven’t finished this point; don’t even think that it’s done! We will need to pursue it, and this is something I insist on because I believe in the richness of a possibility of the concept of singularities, euh, as a philosophical concept and no longer mathematical. Notably, grasp that this changes everything about this problem and about the notion of a universal, a notion that’s not friendly (sympathique). The notion of singularities is philosophically very important, so fine, this is a point that we will develop when we’re back from vacation. If Isabelle is here, we will especially come back to this because we will have made progress today, and will have an opportunity to create a kind of aggregate in the confrontation that I would like to make between Whitehead and Leibniz. That’s one point.
The other points that I asked several among you to take up, but this is not exclusive, the most… I mean, I have called on several among you when we require a kind of technical competence that I lack, or at least that I have less of than you – the second point that we will encounter with Whitehead and Leibniz will concern harmony, as I have indicated from the start. For once again… If you will, this year I’d like you to be sensitive to my effort, not at all because it’s a huge effort, but rather what’s special in it. What I mean is that all my work this year consists in saying that it’s still quite astonishing – I don’t at all pretend that this might be astonishing, that’s it’s only me who understands Leibniz; in that, let’s not exaggerate – but what seems astonishing to me are the obvious things that seem yet to be accomplished. So it’s almost on the level of tail end of a project, when someone says, oh well no, this [topic] isn’t worth it. So I was telling you that it’s still quite simply incomprehensible that there are many commentators on Leibniz who — to my knowledge, none – when they find themselves faced with the famous text about the monad with neither doors nor windows – none say, my God, it’s precisely the architectural module that constantly occurs in the Baroque.
And then, for harmony, I am saying the same thing. I am saying [that] Leibniz uses harmony on all sorts of levels, arithmetic, musical and architectural, among others. And to my knowledge, all the commentators speak about harmony that he theorized under the name “pre-established harmony”, about Leibniz creating a theory under the name “pre-established harmony”, but they do not seek to unify all of these domains of harmony under a philosophical concept, harmony in the sense of arithmetic, harmony in a musical sense, harmony… However, there is certainly something to be said on this, surely, a philosophical concept still to be formed. From this, I was saying to anyone who has a musical background that they think deeply about these notions of harmony, starting with [Pause] the period or the musicians that might be called, correctly or incorrectly, Baroque musicians, and also about Baroque architects. Obviously, all this might open us to the Baroque in this way that architecture becomes a particular music. Fine, this is certainly not the same thing as in other periods or in other conceptions of architecture.
Finally, I remind you that all of our work this year discusses – here as well, this is why I am saying [that] we are astonished by things that nonetheless are… — Start off from one thing as when I was saying, fine, yes, let’s try to define the Baroque, but let’s especially try not to make problems for ourselves that occur for some who’ve introduced preconceived questions. And those who introduce preconceived questions are those who say, oh, be careful, eh? A notion like the Baroque only has value in architecture, that is, questions of genre in which the concept of the Baroque would be adequate or valid. Or else, there are those who limit things to periods, when, at which moment, or limited to whatever country, and then based on such limitations, they go on to distinguish between Mannerism and the Baroque, sometimes the Baroque preceding Classicism, sometimes coming after Classicism, and then the Baroque of a particular region won’t be the Baroque of another region. Central European Baroque won’t be the same as Spanish, and at the extreme – the melancholy of those who, having written an important work on the Baroque, end up by saying, my God, does the Baroque even exist? [Laughter]
So I was telling you that if we don’t want to get into all that — questions of dates, of genres — we have to have a definition that does not attempt to be essential, but that attempts to reach an operative activity. And this is why, from the start, I have told you that we mustn’t be worried. We are going to say that the Baroque is the fold when the fold goes to infinity. And I would say that there is Baroque in any genre whatever if I can justify the idea of a fold that goes to infinity. So, at least I have my criterion. My criterion does not presuppose anything, eh? You see, at that point, I can work around any question on genres or periods, and then I could limit my concept of Baroque or extend it depending on whether this operation of the fold going to infinity is verified or not verified.
So you will tell me, but what does that mean in music, the fold that goes to infinity? Ok, I’m not saying that this would be a music that… , Baroque, but it happens that [Pierre] Boulez writes Fold after Fold (Pli selon pli), and this is music, but he composes Fold after Fold – and I come to my third request for you – all kinds of authors, but I tell myself, if we talk about this idea, it’s funny, right? Because unexpected things arise that henceforth offer proof or ought to offer immense proof, specifically authors that have attached a fundamental importance to this notion of the fold, but suddenly we notice that there are a lot more of them than we had thought. Also, in the second semester, we will have to confront Heidegger, for example, to deal with Heidegger. It’s well known that Heidegger ceaselessly invokes the fold and that, furthermore, the difference between being and the Be-ing (l’étant) is named “the fold”. Would Heidegger be Baroque? Well yes, but it’s not my fault; this isn’t arbitrary. If I call Baroque any author who folds and causes the fold to go to infinity, I can say, well yes, Heidegger is Baroque. Well yes, at least it moves me forward, saying he’s Baroque, it moves me forward. How does that move me forward? It’s a strange kind of Baroque perhaps; maybe we have to distinguish different kinds: this is a kind of Gothic Baroque, [Laughter] because the fold comes down hard, the fold is hard, it comes down hard. This is not the fold of inflection; it’s not Leibniz’s fold, but at least it would permit me to say – ah yes, you know, Heidegger knows Leibniz very well; he doesn’t speak about him too much – but that would permit me to say, perhaps he knows Leibniz even better than he seems to. Perhaps there is something there.[2] But it’s not Heidegger who interests me so much, but rather some among you could then, at the right moment, it would be their turn to talk; I would be talking very little. It’s for you to outline the second semester’s program.
But there is an author the affects me and moves me immensely, and it happens that while rereading him this semester, I had a very vague idea. I told myself, but, but that works, and since there is someone here, Giorgio Passerone, who is working, for completely different reasons, who is encountering and is attached to this author, who is [Stéphane] Mallarmé.[3]  And I suddenly tell myself that, finally, this is strange. It’s not a matter of interpreting. I do not want to interpret Mallarmé at all. Oh leave aside all the interpretations you want; all are good, all are bad, but this is not interpretation, this is the operative act. And furthermore, Mallarmé considered himself as an operator. The word is found explicitly. He doesn’t consider himself an author, but an operator. So I tell myself, what is Mallarmé’s operation, the key operation? Open any Mallarmé text at all, I suggest this to you. Read or reread Mallarmé. You will constantly see the obsession with the fold, on several levels: a famous level, the fan (l’éventail). [Pause] I dare say that Mallarmé is the fan. And also, the fan is the fold par excellence. “The unanimous fold,” “the unanimous fold”, he says.
And then what happens? What else is the fold? Oh, lots of things. Another thing that’s the fold is dust and ashes, inanity. Understand that this allows me to say, good, with Mallarmé, we aren’t going to start off from nothingness (le néant). That [le néant] belongs to the interpretations, but the fold is not an interpretation. It’s something that creates (qui fait). He goes about in his shawl, Mallarmé; he also talks about the fold of lace, and then Madame Mallarmé, his wife, and then Mademoiselle Mallarmé, his daughter, owned fans to go out to the theater, eh? [Deleuze laughs] They don’t do that anymore. And Mallarmé wrote verses of poetry on their fans, of Madame and Mademoiselle Mallarmé, and then on the fans of all the friends of Madame and Mademoiselle. These [writings] were some sublime verses by Mallarmé. Fine. The fan folds open, and by folding, [Deleuze laughs] or rather by moving about, the fan causes to fall in a mirror, causes specks of dust to fall in a mirror that are like grains of matter. [Pause] Ashes in the fog, but ash and fog create folds.
I have the fold of the fan, so here we have the fold chasing after each speck of dust and ash,[4] and the dust and ash fall back down under the wing of the fan, created folds, folds of dust, folds of fog. And perhaps sensitivity (le sensible) – this would be very interesting, since it might link back up with one of Leibniz’s ideas – perhaps that we only see sensitivity through folds of a perpetual fog, according to whether the fog creates and undoes its folds. And I jump to another of Mallarmé’s poems, Bruges,[5] the Belgian town, ô Bruges, in the early morning, visible to the extent the fog allows the stone to appear, the “dilapidated” stone, he says, the “dilapidated” stone (pierre vétuste), that the fog uncovers, “fold after fold.”[6]  “Fold after fold” is an expression that Boulez borrows from Mallarmé’s poem on Bruges. Here I would… [Interruption in the recording] [18:34]
… toward the folds of dust. And these things, fine, no doubt, it’s ash, it’s through the ash, and the world of inanity; it’s the world of sensitivity, it’s the world of sensitivity that I see through the pleats of dust. This is just like saying it’s the world of the newspaper, the world of circumstances. And what is a newspaper? The folded thing par excellence. I’m not the one saying this. Each time that Mallarmé talks about the newspaper, he indicates that it’s what is folded. [Pause]
So I draw your attention toward this series of operations nonetheless, especially as they continue with him telling us about what the inferiority of the newspaper is in relation to the book. Both are folded. This is why the newspaper… Hence Mallarmé’s famous problem: when does literature start? Where does it start? Is the newspaper article literature? Are four lines of verse written on Mademoiselle Mallarmé’s fan literature or not? [Pause] And then? Well, what? What is the superiority? What is superior to the newspaper? The book, THE Book. Why must it be those who have never created a consistent book that are able to speak fully with so much force and authority and persuasion about the book, THE Book? And Mallarmé’s Book, how is… It exceeds the newspaper; he says so explicitly. He says, “the folding of the newspaper with the book goes beyond towards layerings” (tassement), the cubic layering.[7] Think back to something that we learned, how inflection, that is, the fold goes beyond itself toward inclusion. The Book is inclusion; the newspaper is only the fold, but the fold included in The Book is the superior form. I would say, literally, The Book is the monad. [Pause]
That creates some things. So what is this idea? I would say that it’s not… Understand, he sees, he lives things in that way, the fold of the fan that will distribute, like two poles, the folds of ashes and the fold of the newspaper, and the other pole, the fold of The Book that compresses itself in an active unity, The Book. [Pause] Reread Mallarmé from this perspective; I am certain that there is some research to be done, something to be found on the status of the fold and that, after all, there wouldn’t… It’s possible that Mallarmé and Leibniz each will help us, help us to understand each other, and I was telling you that Leibniz, who never stopped writing through small tracts (opuscules) or who never stopped writing in newspapers, isn’t he also someone who, to a certain extent, is the author of the Book, with capital B, and the kind of book that would be a total book as Mallarmé desired it, but as Leibniz desired it as well, each time that he thinks about what he calls the Combinatory? Especially since, and I am trying to jump between each of them, especially since Mallarmé’s Book will be conceived as a kind of Combinatory since through all sorts of possible series, the interior leaves (feuillets) can be combined. Fine. Do some research on this…
So I am suggesting that some among you do research on the Mallarmé topic, that others do research on the topics of harmony in architecture and in music, that others do research on the level of mathematical functions and on the theory of singularities, even if that’s perhaps mathematics as well.
So we will continue on our path here, and you see what we gained at the last class thanks to Marek. I am saying, so fine, we almost have to remain very, very modest and tell ourselves, let’s say as little as possible because Marek was way too kind, you certainly noticed it; he absolutely did not want to make the slightest objection about my doubtful mathematical drawings. But he gave me a kind of benediction which is very precious to me – I ask for nothing more – which was of the kind, ok sure, you can say it that way, mathematically you can say it that way. I ask for no more because what interests me, on the other hand, is what should be said philosophically. So I can be satisfied with the little that can be said mathematically in order… That’s enough for me.
So I am summarizing the little bit that can be said that way mathematically. I was saying that we cannot stay put on this notion in which compossibility and incompossibility would be declared mysteries buried within God’s understanding. We must have a certain expression that would explain that non-sinner Adam no doubt is the opposite of sinner Adam, but that it’s not a contradiction in itself. That is, if you prefer, it’s not contradictory with the world in which Adam sinned, whereas you recall, in 2 and 2 equal 5, here there is an absolute contradiction and that can be demonstrated by the absurd, whereas with non-sinner Adam, there is no contradiction. It’s simply incompossible with our world, that is, with the world in which Adam sinned.
And so my question – I am summarizing the bits we’ve acquired – was: so ok, we have to try to give to this relationship of compossibility and incompossibility, we have to try to give to it a status at any price, and even if Leibniz abandons us at that point, well then, we have to travel a bit along this path provided that it’s possible as a function of the whole of Leibniz. And what I was proposing to you is uniquely this: we start off from singularities. What are singularities? They are something that happens in the world. More precisely, what is it? We saw that this something that happens in the world is an inflection. I am saying that a singularity is a point of inflection. There you are. I am saying indeed that it’s the first sense of singularity, we shall see, and this is why Isabelle Stengers is correct in her letter to tell me that it’s a lot more complicated than that. But we shall see this. We are starting with what’s the simplest.
So there are singularities; I can give myself this. You notice – here I cannot insist enough; this is essential – I am not speaking about the monad. So by what right can we talk about singularity before speaking about the monad, that is, subjects that include singularities? It’s just that, as we saw, I am saying and I repeat that in my view, one can understand nothing about Leibniz, at least about his theory of existence, if we do not perpetually recall this principle: the world is primary in relation to the monads that express it. Leibniz’s text is absolutely indisputable: once again, God did not create sinner Adam; he created the world in which Adam sinned. Monads result from the world; they are not principles of the world. Agreed, the world is included in monads, the world exists in monads, but monads exist for the world. The world does not exist outside of monads; monads are only for one world or another. Monads are for the world, we’ve seen this. I created my little drawing that showed this double proposition: the world exists only in monads, but at the same time, monads exist only for the world. I created the little drawing that authorizes me to speak of an anteriority of the world in relation to monads. When God creates, he has the world in view. So I can speak of singularities that are constitutive of this world. These are: this world is an infinite series of inflections; each inflection corresponds to a state of the world. Henceforth, I can very well say that the world is an infinite aggregate of singularities.
So what will come to define compossibility? We saw this: it’s when, in the prolongation of a singularity all the way to the neighborhood of another singularity, the series is convergent. Series, prolongation, what are these? In mathematics, there are two pairs of notions: singular which is opposed rigorously to regular, singular point, regular point; and another pair that is not entirely equivalent, remarkable that is opposed to ordinary. For the moment, I am identifying the two pairs for a simple reason: it’s that I believe that, philosophically, this is only at another level than we are now on – we’re not there yet — that I could make the distinction. I underscore this so that this stays in your mind for a future moment, the distinction that would have to be made. For the moment, I have no reason to make it since I am still on a level in which the singular and remarkable, on one hand, and regular and ordinary, on the other, can still be treated as synonymous.
So I am saying that the prolongation of a singularity into the neighborhood of another singularity occurs along a line of ordinaries or regulars. For example, look at the side of a square. Fine, you have A and B that are two vertices. You treat them as singular points, and A is extended into the neighborhood of singularity B, that is, extends along a line of ordinaries, that line going from A to B. Not complicated. So I am saying that singularities are compossible. Then, I add, I can say three things, and here I am returning to the points very well outlined by Marek in the previous class. I can say, you know, everything in the world is ordinary; everything is regular, as the professor of daily philosophy said in the novel by Leblanc.[8] Why? Because, ultimately, what is a singularity? It’s the coincidence of two ordinaries. I return to my example of the square: if you place yourself at the vertex B, you can say that [Pause] B as a singular point is the coincidence of the last ordinary on the line A-B and the first ordinary on the line B-C. So you see, in this sense, I can say that everything is ordinary. On the other hand, you recall the law of the world as infinite series: between two points, however close they may be to each other, I can always have a third point inserted through which an inflection passes. In this sense, I would say that everything is singular. There are only singularities. This will be two passages on the line; I can operate these two passages on the line, well, in the loose mathematics that I am proposing.[9]
What I am creating here to defend myself from all mathematical criticism is a kind of axiomatic. Everyone can do what he wants provided that it has a definite result. So then I can say — third proposition — I can say that everything is ordinary, I can say everything is singular, everything is remarkable, and then I can say, between my two passages at the extreme, as Marek said, a singularity exists only as surrounded by a cloud of ordinaries, that is, it is able to be prolonged onto ordinary lines all the way to what? Well, not infinitely prolongable, at least the series is infinite, but it is able to be prolonged all the way to the neighborhood of another singularity which, as Marek said quite correctly, would force me to define a neighborhood, but finally, we can’t do everything. No matter. But in an axiomatic, the relation of a singularity to another would pass through a definition of neighborhood. So here we are: I say two singularities are compossible when the series of development that goes from one into the neighborhood of the other, and from the other into the neighborhood of the first, is a convergent series. [Pause] There is incompossibility when the series is divergent, that is, when it does not pass through the same values. Fine. That’s not complicated; I mean there are no … mathematics, it’s propositions of… of definitions. So I would at least have a definition of compossibility and incompossibility.
Henceforth, you see God’s situation. I invite you take God’s place.
A student: [Inaudible comment]
Deleuze: What? Again? Well we just don’t get enough of taking God’s place. To create the world, God is faced with what? It is faced with possible worlds. [Pause] It finds itself faced with possible worlds, but that are not compossible with one another. You see, [God] is necessarily going to choose – this is how, according to Leibniz, creation is a choice – it is going to choose one possible world, but in this way, it will indeed be forced to exclude the worlds that are incompossible with the other one. This will be the principle of limitation; you see that compossibility and incompossibility are not at all something to which God submits. It’s simply the identity of the created with the limited. There is a fundamental limitation in creation that means: If God — in fact, understand this – if God could create all the worlds at the same time, well then – an outcome that makes Leibniz flinch with horror – why did he lay out this whole story of compossibility and incompossibility? In order not to be Spinozist. The terror of honest philosophers is to be Spinozist. [Laughter] And Spinoza’s idea is quite simple: it’s that God necessarily creates the world, but for a Christian philosopher, this is irritating, God necessarily creating the world. It’s annoying because at that moment, creation is not creation. One has to say that he produces the world and that the world is a style of God (mode de Dieu), and that would mean that the world is necessary. For a Christian philosopher, this isn’t possible. But it’s very important for Leibniz to show that God cannot create the entire possible at once, that is, it cannot cause the entire possible to come into existence. Why? Because the possibles are caught up in relations of incompossibility. So, God must in fact choose one of these worlds. It brings into existence one of the compossible worlds.
What will the law be henceforth? Is [God] going to choose arbitrarily? Obviously not. I am summarizing a lot; I am going very fast. You know Leibniz’s answer: God chooses and brings into existence the best of possible worlds, the best of possible worlds. So while it might not seem so, Leibniz is no idiot. He knows that this world chosen by God is full of catastrophes, torture, innocent lives lost, etc. He will have to justify all that. But he tells us here, almost as a mathematician would, God chooses the best of possible worlds. I don’t know what the other compossible worlds are that God didn’t choose. One must imagine them to be even worse. [Laughter] And what does that mean? So this is where I was telling you – you must pay close attention here – he proposes to us the following schema in order to explain to us what God’s choice is. I add that the schema is not exact, and Leibniz knows this well since he calls on… He assumes a conception of space that is not his own.[10] He tells us: let us suppose that space were a receptacle. And, for Leibniz, space is no receptacle. Space is there, and God’s problem is going to be which world to choose, that is, to bring into space. [Pause] The answer is: it’s the world that will fill up a given space to the maximum. This is a pure metaphor; it’s to help us understand that space is not a receptacle. And then, that would imply that space is finite, and what does all that mean? Don’t give this any importance. Just try to understand it metaphorically.
There’s a receptacle; so well, all worlds are apt to populate their receptacles but at different degrees of filling in (remplissement). There is a single scheme (combinaison) that fills them to the maximum. Suppose that this space-receptacle were a game of chess, a chess board. Fine. I would say that at each moment of the game, you only have, or we suppose, we only have a single scheme such that the aggregate of pieces covers the maximum of squares, once it’s stated that – notice the variety introduced here – once it’s stated that each piece has – how to say this? – its power of action (puissance), its power of action to prolong itself into space according to a move (démarche) – for example, the Knight’s move is not the same as the Bishop’s move, which is not the same as the Queen’s, etc., etc. You have a scheme that allows you to fill the squares of the chessboard to the maximum. [Pause] You will tell me that this gets complicated because there are two players, but taking the two players into account, there is a scheme that allows each, taking account of the other, to fill the maximum of squares. This is the scheme that God causes to come into existence, the best of possible worlds. That is, this means, as [Leibniz] said, the best of worlds is the one that has, that possesses the greatest quantity of reality or perfection, once it’s said that, philosophically, in the seventeenth century, reality and perfection are strictly synonymous. A perfection is something real. The real and the perfect are opposed not to the imperfect, but to the imaginary.
So, the compossible scheme that God causes to come into existence will be the one that presents the greatest quantity of perfection. Hence, the very odd distinction in Leibniz between the two wills of God: on the one hand, what he calls – this doesn’t come from him; these terms are found in theology, but with Leibniz, they take on a very special meaning – the wills or the antecedent will of God and the consequent will of God. The antecedent will of God is the movement through which or tendency by which each possible, whatever it is, everything that’s possible tends toward existence. Look at the text On the Radical Origin of Things where this thesis is developed. In God’s understanding, all the possibles, each possible tends toward existence. [Pause] This tendency toward existence, this tendency to pass… [Interruption of the recording] [47:26]
Part 2
… on all sorts of floors. I always come back to my idea of apartments. There are a lot of apartments in the understanding and the will of God. We must speak of God’s understanding by distinguishing the regions since — if you recall what we’ve already done here quite well – there’s a first region of God’s understanding that is defined by and that contains the absolutely Simples, the absolutely simple notions, that is, the pure Identicals, the infinite forms of which each one [Deleuze coughs violently] is identical to itself.[11] Second region of God’s understanding, [Pause] the relations, [Pause] when notions enter into relations with one another, and this time, these are no longer the Identicals. These are the Definables which appeared to us to be another kind of inclusion. Third region of God’s understanding: the requisites; this is indeed something else. I won’t go back over it. This was [material] in sessions we’ve already seen. Fourth region: [Pause] singularities insofar as they pass into existence. This sphere of divine understanding already calls upon the will to create a world under the form of antecedent will. Fifth region: the relations of compossibility and incompossibility resulting in only the best of schemes coming into existence under the action of consequent will. This is an understanding in five regions at least and a will in two regions at least. This is interesting because other philosophers spoke quite rapidly about God’s will and all that, but it’s fine, for Leibniz, these are multiplied. It’s not rendered complicated; it’s multiplied.
So, if I summarize still, you recall, and I am going back and drawing conclusions about the great distinction of propositions of essence and propositions of existence. Both are under the regime of inclusion of the predicate in the subject.[12] You recall, the predicate is not an attribute; it’s an event. [Pause] The inclusion of a predicate in the subject is the sufficient reason. In what sense? Because inclusion gives the very reason of the predicate. If the predicate can be called “of the subject,” it’s because it is in the notion; it’s because it is included in the notion of the subject, that is, its sufficient reason there. I can simply say for the moment that there is always sufficient reason, but in the propositions of essence, [Pause] identity acts as sufficient reason and is enough to act as sufficient reason. This comes down to saying what? Here I hesitate again to use mathematical terms, but out of commodity I would say: we saw that we could not distinguish the two kinds of truths of essence and existence, the two types of propositions, by saying in the case of propositions of essence, [that] that the analysis is finite, and, in the case of propositions of existence, [that] the analysis is infinite. Why? Because the infinite is everywhere, that seemed to us a very, very poor interpretation. There are infinite series in any event. But I would say that in the propositions of essence, the series is – and here I will use also use a mathematical term, but open to… not very – I would say that it suffices for the series to be compact, as mathematicians say, that is, that between two terms, one might  always be able to insert others, a compact series, whereas on the level of propositions of existence, this is very different: the series is convergent or divergent. For me, this would be the great difference between the two types of propositions. [Pause]
Here we have a first point. In the end, I have organized, summarized a whole group of things. Those who have not yet understood entirely will have a chance to return to this when we create the graph of the aggregate of Leibniz’s principles.[13] Notably, as I open a parenthesis, you won’t be surprised that in Leibniz, there is a principle that he calls the “principle of the Best”, notably that God chooses the best of the worlds, “the best” meaning the one that presents the maximum quantity of reality. There will always be a principle of the Best, and we will see all that later.
So here I have come to the end of this story, or rather, this first kind of singularity that are the inflections. The singularities that are the inflections are states of the world as well. I was indeed saying, you see – and without this, everything in what I am saying would collapse – from a certain point of view, the singularities have to be primary in relation to individuals. [Pause] What are the singularities? These are not individuals; these are events. If I am to define an event, I would say it’s quite simple: it’s the aggregate of singularities able to be prolonged. [Pause] That’s what the event is. That logic should be a logic of the event comes down to saying, well yes, logic is a logic of singularities or of singular points, in their relation with the ordinaries, in their relation with the regulars. And yet again, it’s always along a scale that the regular is regular; if on the subsequent scale, the lowest scale, you make an inflection pass through, the ordinary becomes singular. There are all the transformations that you would like to the extent that, at the outside, an event only includes singularities, but according to your perception; it’s according to your perception. According to the acuteness or dullness (la finesse ou la lourdeur) of your perception, there will be more or fewer singularities in an event. That will commit us already – no, I don’t mean immediately – but that will commit us to a theory of perception that is obviously going to be very, very strange, like everything emerging from Leibniz.
Understand, you have the example of a fly. First, these are not the same events. When I am in the same room as a fly, [Laughter] think about what is an event for the fly and what is an event for me. [Laughter] For example, a fly is an event for me, but I am not an event for the fly. [Laughter] What it grasps are other events of which I might be the cause. But it’s obvious that the evaluation of events cannot be the same since the fly and I, we are not in the neighborhood of the same singularities. You have a theory of perception that implies an entire differential conception of perception in which living beings perceive under conditions of the singularities they grasp and the prolongation of these singularities along lines of ordinaries. [Pause] Think about the path of the fly and the infinity of singularities that mark the inflections in the path of the fly at every instant.
So what is going to constitute a perception? There too lies a problem. We certainly could have expected that problem to drop down on us. It will be derived directly. You see, for the moment in my concern about going slowly and about not mixing up different problems too much, I say ok, you see, I come back to: singularities precede the individual. Why? Exactly like the world, from a certain point of view, pre-exists the monad. God creates the world; so now that the world exists only in monads, that’s something else. But God creates the world. Once again, it creates the world in which Adam sinned, and you see what that means: it creates this particular compossible. It creates the aggregate of the compossible. It creates the world in which Adam sinned; it doesn’t create the sinner Adam. It creates the sinner Adam because it chooses the world in which Adam sinned. But the singularity, the event, Adam’s sin, I can say, to some extent, pre-exists the individual Adam. There is an individual sinning Adam only because God chose the world that has sin for a singularity, and the sin is going to be included in Adam. But God had to choose this world and not Adam particularly. It chose the world in which Adam sinned.
Thus, and in all my definitions here of a singularity as being the element of the event, I have assumed nothing about the individual. [Pause] Hence, as I was saying, what is an individual? There is a single solution; yet again, I don’t believe that there is a satisfactory and even possible definition conceivable if we don’t admit to pre-individual singularities. And an important book – and here as well, [it’s] one that does not quote Leibniz, but it appears to me to be Leibnizian in inspiration – an important book on individuation, therefore, appeared a few years ago by [Gilbert] Simondon on individuation, speaking precisely about this notion, pre-individual singularities, that he studies from a point of view in physics, in mathematical physics.[14] So, we don’t need to take up Simondon’s topics here, since we have Leibniz’s that are quite adequate.[15]
If in fact there are pre-individual singularities as so many inflections and inflections of inflections as inciting the states of the world, I can say [that] the individual results from this. What will that be, the individual? Once again, an individual, I say, will be a condensation of singularities. [Pause] I am calling event an aggregate of singularities able to be prolonged and convergent; I am calling individual a condensation, concentration or accumulation of singularities. [Pause] Does that correspond to something literally in Leibniz? Yes. Response to Monsieur [Pierre] Bayle: “Each monad is a concentration of the universe.” And, once again, what is the universe? We must not forget that the universe is the infinite series of states, that is, the inflections definable as singularities. An accumulation of singularities, a condensation of singularities, is a monad, that is, an individual subject.
Only that creates problems for us, lots of problems. Here we must be very, very concrete. Finite or infinite? If I have defined the individual as a condensation of singularities, is it a question of a finite number or an infinite number of singularities? I myself respond: for a definition of the individual, I obviously answer: a finite number, a finite number of singularities. Why? This seems strange. One would expect… You recall perhaps what an individual is, what a monad is. A monad expresses the world, that is, it includes all compossible singularities. But – and this will be essential for our learning today, if we get there – but it expresses clearly only a small portion of the world. And here we have such a beautiful idea, and this is indeed how an individual is distinguished from another individual. [Pause] You see? So, myself, I express a whole world from its start to its end. We will see, these are things we have not yet seen, but the entire past, the entire future of the universe is included in the monad since I am a monad, an individual notion. So, I express the whole world, only here we are, I only expression a portion, I only express clearly a finite portion, [Pause] the one that concerns me. Fine.[16]
And no doubt, I even express it differently, I express it… Even if you take… There are kinds of encroachment (des empiètements), and that’s why on this level you discover your constructions of convergent series. For example… But these will be secondary convergences and divergences, that is, which will be inside the same compossible world. I take two persons of the same generation. Me, I can say that I express among, in my region of clear expression, there’s the Spanish Civil War, Hitler, the Second World War. Ok. But already this must be stated: I express the Spanish Civil War clearly, but much less clearly than someone who lived it and fought in it there. So there are degrees of clarity. [Pause] Fine. So, in a same generation, in your case, you don’t express clearly the Spanish Civil War. It’s not your fault. You can only express it either through family tradition or through hearsay, knowing someone who was in it, or by what Leibniz calls in a very lovely expression, through “blind knowledge”, when you have read books about the Spanish Civil War. This isn’t the same. For you certainly sense the small portion that I express clearly, the small portion of the world that I express clearly, that is linked to my body.
Oh yoo, yoo, yoo, yoo, I’d say. [Laughter] What did I just say here since we have never spoken about the “body”? And one must flip this around. It’s not because it concerns my body that I express clearly. But I only have a body because I have my small, clear region of expression, and my body is simply what will be derived from this clear expression. This is because, as monad, as individual notion, I am expressing the entire world, but I only express clearly a small portion of the universe since, henceforth, I have a body that is going to be the material condition through which I clearly express this region. And I would say, henceforth what I express clearly, the small portion that I express clearly, yes, here this concerns my body, my body being the material condition.
You see, each of us expresses a small region, the one concerning one’s body, but that this concerns one’s body is a result – it’s not a principle since, once again, we don’t yet know what a body is. But we just know that – this is not surprising – that the world is a body, that each individual is a body. Each individual is a body since it clearly expresses a region of the universe and since one’s body is the condition through which it expresses this region, once again, the condition being material. Caesar expresses the Rubicon; I too express the Rubicon, but I don’t express it at all distinctly or clearly, not at all. I express it like I express the infinite aggregate of the universe, yes, but Caesar, he expresses the Rubicon clearly insofar as he got his feet wet in the Rubicon. And no doubt, it’s not a matter of feet, [Laughter] but rather a matter of mind. Was he going to cross the Rubicon, that is, was he going to put his feet into the Rubicon? This is what we call the problem of voluntary events.
So, in fact, I am in the process of proposing to you a deduction on three levels. [Pause] I am going from bottom to top, and not from top to bottom. The final [bottom] level: I express clearly a part of the world, a finite part of the world, on the condition of having my body. [Pause] Above this: why [do] I have a body? One must not say that I express clearly because I have a body; one must say that I have a body because I express clearly a finite region of the universe. Henceforth, this finite region, I will express it, as Leibniz says, under the relation of my body, but one must especially not reverse the order of causality. It’s because you express clearly a small, finite region of the universe that you have a body. [Pause] Notice what immensity of progress is opening before you! Your region of clear expression is finite. And once again, what is your task? [Pause] To enlarge it as much as you can, to expand it the most you can.
Here I mean, believe me, this is about translating into Leibnizian terms some extremely concrete problems, but as Leibniz states it, it’s very concrete: the best soul will be the one that will be capable of enlarging its region of clear expression. When I’m a child, I have a small clear expression. That is, it’s understood that each monad in the end has a reduced portion of clear expression, but hugely variable within certain limits. When we say about someone, “oh, what he could have done, what couldn’t he have done? He wasted himself.” What does it mean when it’s said generally that children are better than adults? Because with children, there’s generally still a bit of hope. [Laughter] With children, you understand, there’s still… It’s not always true; there are children for whom one doesn’t know where things are going to go. [Laughter] But really yes, it’s going to be enlarged, one’s portion of the universe, but when one says about an adult, “he could really have made more of himself, he could have done better,” as is said, “yes, he could have done better,” that means [that] he didn’t enlarge at all…. There are people, there are people of a very mature age that have kept, well, the portion of clear expression of a five year old. We call them “feeble” (débiles). [Laughter] They have a tiny clear region. So with them, one must look for it, eh? And if one speaks to them about — I don’t know — the Spanish Civil War, if one says Hitler to them, if one says racism to them, no, that doesn’t matter to them, that doesn’t matter to them. This means – it’s as if they were Leibnizians – they would say, oh, excuse me, no, that’s not in my clear region, it’s not in what I express clearly. [Laughter] Sense that there’s a whole problem here, eh? Is it enough to say that God made me like [that]? God made me a cretin? [Laughter] Or is it suitable to say, oh monad – because we must call people monads – tell me, monad over there, you still could have enlarged your [clear] region.
So that’s the second [level]. See, the body’s story results from that. But still a final point: we must not believe that I am individual because I have a small, clear region since my having a clear region in my expression of the universe is my nominal definition. Tell me what you express clearly and who does not intersect with anything that another individual expresses clearly. See why Leibniz is able to say [that] there are no similar individuals although every individual expresses the universe and the same universe. And when he says this is not from the same point of view – we have seen all this –, that means [that] two individuals do not have the same clear region of expression. And I say why? Just as I was climbing upward from having a body to having a region of clear expression, where does this region of clear expression come from? That is, what would be the real definition of the individual since having a region of clear expression, is this only a nominal definition?[17] Well, I’ve got it. — We are really moving forward. What a relief! — The real definition of the individual is a condensation of singularities. This is because I am… Because each me is a condensation of singularities [Pause] and a finite number of singularities, it expresses a clear portion of the universe, a finite portion of the universe, the one in which its singularities are incarnated in events. [Pause] So that is my final definition of the individual, a condensing of pre-individual singularities. [Pause]
But that is going to throw us back into problems; here I don’t want to weary you too much. I will simply list them. Henceforth we have to conceive that a monad is constructed around a small number of singularities. This is what Leibniz sometimes calls primitive predicates of the monad. So I was telling you, fine, for Adam … So, of course, I can hear well. You must not create difficulties for me where there aren’t any. Of course, this little number of finite singularities can be deployed to infinity. That doesn’t prevent it from composing a finite region of the universe. So here, on this point, just give me a break, no difficulties.
And I was saying, Adam, you take… Let’s make a list! For everyone, I was saying, make your list, and let all this be useful in some way for your life. Make your graph (table)… [Pause] Leibniz thinks in terms of graphs; these aren’t windows. If there are no windows, it’s because there are graphs in Leibniz. The monad is without doors or windows, but it has a lot of graphs, [Laughter] necessarily. It’s on graphs that the entire Combinatory is inscribed, the Combinatory. So, you make your graph of singularities. I was saying Adam, fine: first man, that’s an Adam singularity. It’s a primitive predicate. Living in a garden, a second primitive predicate, a second singularity; having a woman created from his rib, a third singularity; fourth singularity, in the world chosen by God, that is, in the best of worlds, he sins. This is an event, and it’s a singularity. I would say that this belongs to and circumscribes the clear region expressed by Adam who nonetheless expresses the entire world; that is, it expresses both what will happen to Caesar and what will happen to Christ, but he expresses this obscurely and in a muddled way. What does this mean, obscurely and muddled? That will come later; right now, it’s impossible to say. Fine.
So you have to do likewise. What are your own singularities, both inside and outside? Well… But I can make a list of my own. So I would have to… oh, but overall, these can always by multiplied to infinity, but… For example, if some among you in school… Oh, everything depends on their importance. Perhaps you again sense the arrival of the remarkable and the not remarkable. I mean, when the individual condenses singularities, at that moment, the singularities take on a remarkable aspect.[18] What’s remarkable in your life? There are lives that are believed to be magnificent and yet there is nothing remarkable. There are lives that are extremely monotonous and that are very, very remarkable. There are lives disturbed by truly insane vacuums, and these are lives of banality itself. Beware of the notion of the remarkable. It’s not enough to go traveling to the islands to achieve the remarkable. It’s not enough to take grand trips to reach the remarkable. You can travel the whole world and more than the worlds and around the world, etc., and your clear portion of the universe stays as limited as a horse’s, [Laughter] an iron horse, with its [inaudible due to the laughter]. On the other hand, on the other hand, you can just stay put and achieve a zone, a clear portion of expression that will be fantastic. But this is not a law either. There are some that move about and enormously extend their portion. There’s no law. Each time it’s up to you to see what has worked and what hasn’t for you, when you cause the remarkable and the important to emerge, if only for you.
I am saying some very simple things, so let’s move on to the amorous domain. Fine, a great love, what do you want? Of course it’s remarkable. The remarkable doesn’t mean… beware of Leibniz’s pseudo-optimism. That means that even if not turning out well, [Laughter] it can be remarkable. For people who don’t know how to love, normally this isn’t all that brilliant, people who don’t know how to love. They are missing a sense. Generally, they think they are clever. As Nietzsche said, they wink. Winking means love, but not making it. But some people to whom no one makes love, you know, there are some people with a certain weakness, eh? It’s not necessarily due to malice that no one makes love to them. It’s because they’re jerks, that’s all, eh? [Laughter] So make your graph, the missed opportunities, all those things I have passed by… [Pause]
You know, when you want to do philosophy, you notice quickly, and it’s also true about the rest, that true/false are expressions devoid of meaning, and that this isn’t how things happen, and that what happens in events of though isn’t true/false, but rather the remarkable or the ordinary, important or non-important. And it’s even true for the sciences. You can create axiomatics all you like, if you just have enough technical ability. You create as magnificent an axiomatic as you like, [Deleuze laughs] the question isn’t of seeing if it’s true or false. The question is seeing if it has the least bit of interest. And this is how mathematicians speak. If you are a sufficiently good mathematician, you can create some theorems, you can invent them. And you won’t be told it’s false; you’ll be told, sir, this is strictly of no interest.
So you can always argue, but you understand, this is why arguments are entirely useless, so it’s a waste of time. It’s a waste of time because how do you intend to argue about the important and the non-important, the remarkable or the ordinary? You understand, when a teacher corrects an essay, … I remember my time teaching in a high school (lycée); I’ve corrected essays (dissertations). Well, I never found myself faced with anything false, or so rarely that it was a stretch to write down “false”, [Laughter] do you see? If someone said, Aristotle is a disciple of Descartes, there I would write down “false”. [Laughter] I’d be pleased, but that didn’t happen to me. That doesn’t happen. What happens? What happens is that one reads tons of papers that have neither importance nor interest. Explaining to someone that what they’ve written is without interest, on one hand, is insolent so one shouldn’t do it, and moreover, one has to be very sure of oneself. I myself don’t know at all if something has no interest. I tell myself, I see no interest here, there’s little of interest, but perhaps it will take on interest in three years when the author will have enlarged his or her region. But what do you want to say? What do you want to say?
So… or else in an argument, it’s wonderful: you don’t have the same region of expression; you aren’t in the same domain. So obviously, one can argue to infinity, but it’s a waste of time. That [process] disperses fog into the other’s domain and vice versa. It’s not worth it. It’s so difficult just thinking alone that when one has to do it with several people, you know, that’s not just nothing. So there are magnificent cases, in fact, in which interferences, in which there’s a convergent series inside the world. Two guys – I’ve lived this, so, and I’m still living this, but I’m not the only one. Working with someone, that means it’s two very different regions, but they have… they have – how to say it – a common zone, and starting from this common zone, that’s going to irradiate into both of them, and these are extremely complex cases that everyone who has worked in common… That’s what team work is.  But at that point, you realize that it’s not about arguing. One doesn’t argue; one never argues, never. There are only imbeciles that argue, or else if it’s a matter of spending an hour over a drink, ok, let’s go argue for a bit. [Laughter] But in any case, that has nothing to do with any activity that we could call, from close up or from afar, doing philosophy. This has to do with what people call opinion, of the kind “do you think that God exists”? etc. But in the end, that has no interest, and above all, no importance. That’s what I’d like you to sense.
So, on this point, what happens? We still are faced with a lot of problems. It’s that… Take two monads, two individual subjects. They can have a small number of singularities in common. [Pause] So, will this be the same individual, or won’t it be the same individual? And then, here’s what drops down on our heads: by what right do you name two individuals Adam, the one who sinned, the first man who sinned in a particular compossible world, and the one who wouldn’t have sinned although he might be the first man, so he deserves the name Adam because he’s the first man and he lives in the garden? On this point, one of the two sins, the other doesn’t sin. Why name them both Adam? Do I have the right to name them both Adam?[19] In his correspondence [with Leibniz], Arnauld doesn’t let up on Leibniz and says: but what is that about? Why are you calling him Adam, even the one that didn’t sin in the other world, within the other world that was possible? You see, this is a bit of a problem. Or Sextus, in the text of the Theodicy that I read to you, that has a Sextus staying in Rome and taking power; and there’s another Sextus who heads off to Corinth; and another Sextus who goes off to cultivate his garden; three Sextuses, but by what right do they deserve the same proper name?[20]
One must suggest this; here’s what I’d like to say: I mean that Leibniz, when he thinks about the problem of individuation – [To a student close to him] Oh, I’m going to hurry up, ok? These are details, you’ll see; refer to the Arnauld-Leibniz correspondence – first, when he thinks about the problem of individuation, Leibniz doesn’t seem to follow the path I indicated. I’m telling you this so that you won’t get angry with me, for he seems to pose an entirely different problem. He says, “So, however far you went in specification,” that is, in the determination of smaller and smaller species, “however far you went in specification, you will never reach the individual.” Individuation is not a specification, even ultimate. “However far you went in specification, you will always have within the species, however small it might be, an infinity of at least possible individuals.” You see, [this is] the irreducibility of the individual to specification, that we express by saying the individual isn’t a final species, or in Latin, the individual is not ultima species. Understand? [Pause]
It’s said that St. Thomas – ok, fine – it’s said that St. Thomas made an exception for angels, [Laughter] for angels. You understand immediately why: angels have a glorious body, that is, that are not subject to the accidents of matter. So, for angels, the individual has to be the ultima species; their final species has to be simultaneously their individual. All that’s interesting, eh?  [Pause] And Leibniz writes this text with great joy. But you see? Well then, for me, this is everyone. We are all angels. If you push specification far enough, you reach the individual. In other words, the individual is the infima species. [Pause]
I am completing this so you might appreciate what’s completely new in this idea by Leibniz, the individual as infima species, the individual as final species. If you continue the specification to infinity, you will reach the individual. Individuation is a specification continuing to infinity. In order for you to understand what’s deeply new in such a thesis, I say, here you are, a whole current of philosophy exists named Nominalism. Nominalism is those people saying that there are only individuals and that concepts are only words, words that, of course, have their rules of usage. But what exists only exists in individuals or particular things. Concepts are words, and the problem of logic is the rules of usage in words. You see? A Nominalism of this sort perfectly existed – it still abounds today – perfectly existed in Leibniz’s era. For example, you find elements of it in works by a very great philosopher named Hobbes.
And so, and so, and so, Leibniz would say the same thing in part; he’d say, of course, only individuals exist, but understand – and here, Leibniz’s thought is very, very strong – this doesn’t make him a Nominalist, because Leibniz’s idea is that if there are only individuals as Nominalists say quite well, it’s for a reason opposite the one that Nominalists believe in, specifically it’s because concepts are words. It’s because concepts have the power to go to infinity, that is, to specify all the way to infinity. In other words, it’s by reason of the power (puissance) of the concept that there are only individuals. [Pause] Here we have enough to make Hegel gasp with jealousy, [Laughter] and besides, he never came close to discovering such a truth. It’s by virtue of the concept’s strength that the concept goes all the way to the individual that the individual is the concept. We saw this with the individual notion, with Leibniz’s idea of individual notion.
But suddenly, I am pointing out to you – and with this, I am taking a bit of a risk – it’s only apparently that Leibniz speaks of genus and species. In fact, the individual is not an infinitely continued specification. The true line – and we will see why – Leibniz’s true line, once again, is the individual as condensation of singularities. [Pause] He does not speak of genus and then species, and then species and then infinitely continued specification that would go all the way to the individual. He speaks of pre-individual singularities and defines the individual as a condensing of singularities, as a condensation of singularities, and once more, of singularities able to be prolonged following convergent series. I would say, in this sense – you should understand what this means – I would say [that] singularities are the requisites of the individual, once it’s stated that, for Leibniz, every thing has requisites, that is, conditions. The individual’s requisites – this is also a misunderstanding to avoid – the individual’s requisites are not genera or species; they are singularities. Ah if you understand that, you understand everything.
But that will explain to you suddenly why Leibniz invokes genera and species for I then ask, what is a genus and a species? Where does that come from? Here I am taking a little risk, but this ought to work out fine. It has to work out. Assume that these singularities are condensed within an individual with one condition, we have seen, of being able to be prolonged following convergent series, of being prolonged into the neighborhood of each other following convergent series. There we have the concrete operation that will make the concentration possible. Assume now that through an abstraction of the mind, you considered singularities separated from one another. You cut them off from their prolongation. At that moment, I would say the singularities become indefinite. Instead of saying Adam who sinned lives in a particular garden, you are going to abstract a singularity by cutting it off from its prolongation. You are going to undertake, if you will, a surgery of singularities. You extract a singularity in order to consider it in itself. At that moment, it becomes an indefinite singularity, A garden. [Pause] Fine, at that moment, it’s a genus. When you cut off the requisites from their prolongation, when you cut off singularities from their convergent series, you only have indefinite singularities that, henceforth, present themselves as general concepts. This is the operation that will allow you to say AN Adam, an Adam in A garden, and commit to this world in which a particular Adam sins and to that other world in which Adam does not sin, and the same word “Adam” will be used in the sense of AN Adam. [Pause] You see, I would say that this would allow – this would be great from the point of view of a logic of the proper name – that would allow conditions to be set according to which a proper name can be preceded by an indefinite article. That would be beautiful, and we would have the entirety of Leibniz’s theory of individuation. Good.
I’m finishing… I’m finishing, I’m finishing. And well, what problems remain for us? If I returned to the entirety of what we’ve done over many, many sessions, you will recall that on the level of propositions of essence, propositions of the mathematical type, we have undertaken all sorts of considerations from the Identical on to definitions, and on to requisites, and we said [that] the task of propositions of essence is to set the requisites of a domain. And then, we took propositions of existence, and we saw the inclusion of monads, that is, we saw individual notions, whereas on the other side, we saw so-called simple notions, either the absolutely simple notion, the Identicals, or the relatively simple notion, the requisites. With propositions of existence, we discover another type of notion, individual notions. First question: where does the junction of the two domains occur? Answer: on the level of requisites. The singularity belongs to the domain of existence, but it is precisely the requisite of the individual. [Pause] There is also an angled linkage of propositions of essence with propositions of existence; it’s through the notion of the requisite, when the requisite, the individual’s requisite, that is, is a singularity, a pre-individual singularity. I can say that – and here I think this [Deleuze hesitates] is relative, it’s quite important for Leibniz’s philosophy – I assume that both domains of essences and existences are prolonged continuously by the requisites. You go from requisite to requisite all the way to the requisites constituted by the singularities.
There you have, this is how a second problem would articulate itself. What remains for us? Here we have a problem for the future. We remain in a tête-à-tête between two kinds of notions, individual notions of existence or monads, and simple notions of essence, specifically Identicals or requisites. The relation of one and the other, the relation of the individual notion with simple notions, is called reflection. It belongs to the monad to reflect and, by reflecting, to think of simple notions, the monad being an individual notion. But thinking of simple notions is not simply thinking about them; it’s to create Combinatories, to complete graphs, etc. It’s to undertake science. On what condition? On the condition that the monad is lifted up to a clear region of expression sufficiently large for it to encompass what a simple notion means.
And animals don’t know what a simple notion is. Their region of clear expression is so tiny, so tiny, and lots of people among humans have no idea and will never enter into the tête-à-tête. So this will be our task: what is the relation designated by the reflection between individual notions and simple notions? There is one solution that we must exclude, although this comes from, I believe, one of the greatest commentators on Leibniz. Gueroult suggested that in this extremely complicated problem about which Leibniz’s texts are extremely rare, we could say that in the depth of each monad, in the depth of each individual notion, there’s a simple notion.[21] I for one think that Gueroult absolutely did not himself believe in this solution that, in the end… fine, it’s no matter. In any case, for us, we see why it’s impossible since we have placed something else in the depth of each monad. We have placed in the depth of each monad a determinate or determinable number of singularities. And simple notions are not singularities. They are Identicals. So this solution is not feasible.
So another answer to this problem that I lean toward more is that there is a relation between individual notions and simple notions to the extent that simple notions organize requisites of domains [Pause] and that the individual begins with its own requisites that are the singularities. Therefore, there is continuous development that causes us to pass from simple notions to individual notions and causes us to pass in the following way: there’s an individual notion when the requisites are singularities. [Pause] And fine, we’ve covered a great bit!
But then, what emerges here? A problem obviously. This is in all your minds! It’s on all your lips! Fine, all that is very well, but then what? Monads that contain the world and God chose the world in which Adam sinned, and the sin is included in Adam since Adam expresses the world, and the sin is his clear region, can someone be so badly constituted to have in his clear region something as evil as sin? And furthermore, are we free? What does that mean? If there is inclusion of the predicate in the subject, if crossing the Rubicon is included in Caesar, if sin is included in the individual notion of Adam — although we say, of course, in this compossible world, not another — the fact is that in this world, God caused sin to pass into existence as a predicate encompassed in the monad Adam; crossing the Rubicon is encompassed in the monad Caesar. As Leibniz says, if he hadn’t crossed the Rubicon, that would have been another Caesar. Fine, that is, we would return to our hypothesis of the indefinite proper name: but that Caesar, he had to cross the Rubicon. And that Adam, he had to sin. You yourself, you had to undertake all the horrors that you’ve committed [Laughter] and me, [I had to do] all the good works that I never cease pursuing. [Laughter] This is an example; you can correct it for yourself. [Laughter] And well, yes, what is that? What is that?
But what I would like to say, if you aren’t too tired, what I’d like to say is that Leibniz appears to me to be one of the most extraordinary philosophers of freedom, and that nonetheless, this seems to have begun poorly. Inclusion – understand — inclusion of the predicate in the individual subject seems to completely forbid liberty to the extent that liberty seems suppressed by Leibniz even more than by Spinoza, about whom [Leibniz] stated that [Spinoza] suppressed it.[22]
So well, what’s going to happen in Leibniz when he agrees to consider this, for he is so very clever, you know, for he spends his time saying, but I’m going to speak to you about the problem of freedom, I’m going to show you how I am saving it? And we realize with astonishment that [while] he’s in the process of speaking to us, he seems to be talking to us about our freedom, that is, something of great interest for us, whereas, he’s spending his time speaking to us of God’s freedom. So, one wants to say, ok fine, were God to be free, that would already create problems for us. Is God free, and in what sense is it free? You see why. God was free because God chooses between the worlds both of which are compossible, but they are incompossible with one another. So, we say, well yes then, it’s subject to the laws of incompossibility. No, because the laws of incompossibility, it’s [God’s] the one who created them! So that works out well for God. It’s not so complicated, God’s freedom. But how about ours ?! In what sense is Caesar free to cross the Rubicon? In what sense is Sextus free to rape Lucretia? There we have a real problem.
And to my knowledge, there’s an enormous number of texts by Leibniz on freedom, but there are very few that don’t discuss God’s freedom. He tells us a very simple thing: Leibniz tells us, you understand that, 2 and 2 not to make 4 would be impossible. And in other words, it’s necessary for 2 and 2 to make 4. But were Adam to sin – here’s the vocabulary; I am trying to set the terminology – but that Adam sins or Sextus rapes Lucretia or Caesar crosses the Rubicon, that’s not necessary, only it’s certain and assured. [Laughter] So he says – you must pay attention – it’s not a mathematical necessity; it’s a moral certitude. See why [this is] a moral certitude since it’s the best of possible worlds, but from which I retain [that] it’s certain that Adam sins, has sinned, and will sin. Before the sin, it’s certain that Adam would sin. It’s certain that… Is it enough to say, does distinguishing certitude and necessity suffice in order to assure freedom? In my view, at first glance, that suffices to save God’s freedom. That doesn’t suffice to save our freedom. And yet, I am telling you [that] Leibniz is without doubt the philosopher who created such an extraordinary philosophy of freedom that it’s fully satisfying for all of us, but there as well, it seems to me, it was not… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
And I see only two fundamental texts on… in which he doesn’t pull back: the first is the fifth letter to Clarke – Clarke was an English disciple of Newton – there was an extremely uncomfortable exchange of letters between Clarke and Leibniz, very tense, because there was such a settling of scores between Newton and Leibniz, very, very tense. But it’s in the final letter from Leibniz to Clarke that Leibniz tells us himself some extraordinary things about freedom.[23] And on the other hand, another longer text, New Essays on Human Understanding, book 2, chapter 21, that belongs to the greatest texts, … both texts belong to the greatest texts of the philosophy on human freedom. Fine.
So, at this point, I direct a question to you: I myself would like to begin. If you are no longer able, there’s not point then, no point. If you aren’t able to, those who are unable can leave without… I told you, you put me in such a state that I cannot release you, and cannot give you a break. There we are. So, those who’ve had enough, they can leave, and those who have questions to ask on what we’ve done today, they can stay. Ehhhh… or else, then, I just continue, I can start on freedom if you feel lively enough mentally. Excuse me for proceeding this way. Who would like to continue on freedom?… Yes, you still can, this won’t last long. That way, I will pick this up again after vacation. [Pause]
Well, I’m going to tell you, [Pause] I’m going to tell you, Leibniz tells us two things, in my view. This is very simple: everything rests on an astonishing psychology of the motive (motif), of the motive. When Leibniz wonders, but what precisely is a motive?[24] A motive, a motive for acting, what is a motive? He’s going to tell us two things in the letters to Clarke, in the fifth letter to Clarke.[25] Why? Because when we compare motives, for example, you see, do I leave or do I stay? Do I leave or do I stay? Do I cross the Rubicon or do I not cross it? Do I, Sextus, take power or do I not seize it? Or else, do I call my loved one or do I not call? That’s a problem, eh? Or else, do I go out to the movies or not go out at all? I am multiplying, but… cases.
And well, and well, and well, when you consider motives like scales, like weights on a scale, the mind will go to the strong side where you discovered the weights. It’s simply that you don’t sense this immediately. With a perfect set of scales, we’d say in fact that artificial conditions are required: the plate has to be well balanced, all that. To follow the metaphor, resetting everything from zero would be needed, all that. We’d have to… Ok, fine. So when you do that, it’s obvious that you are objectifying the motives. You make of the motive an objective representation as if the motive was something existing outside the mind and that the mind represented for itself. In other words, the first error regarding the problem of freedom is an operation that we always observe consisting of objectifying the motive, as if the motive were some thing, any thing at all, a distinct representation of the soul whereas the motive purely and simply is an act of the soul and there is no motive and soul. There is the soul that projects itself in a motive. This is very close to a phenomenology; it’s a phenomenology of the motive. Here you have the first illusion not to hold onto, not to entertain.
A second illusion: when you compare motives to weights and you have – I don’t know what; I don’t know what I’m saying – and you’ve objectified them, you complete that with a second error, specifically you must divide them, in fact, since you must invoke the motives in order to choose a specific motive. What [Leibniz] says there is very, very intelligent. You have to distinguish the motive, on one hand, and on the other, the inclinations, he says, the inclinations that cause you to prefer one particular motive to another. So therefore, you both objectify the motive and, having lost subjectivity, you divide it into an objective motive and a subjective inclination.
There’s the dual critique. From this point, he’s going to relate his vision, his splendid vision of the motive. It’s five in the evening; no, it’s seven minutes to noon, and I tell myself, well hey, I’d really like to go to the café, and you see my drama: it’s the two motives, so one could believe them to be weights on a scale: do I continue working on my course, or do I go to the café?[26] I say this all the more lightly since I never go to cafés anymore, [Laughter] so don’t think that this is a living example. It’s an abstract example. Or else, some among you that are here, do I stay or do I leave? Fine.
So, Leibniz says, if you objectify the motive, first, you are going to believe that you are considering for the first time – admire this! – that you are considering for the first time your two motives: go to the café, stay home and work. Good. And then, you leave off for a moment; you give yourself some time for reflection, and then you return to your two motives. When you have objectified your two motives, you have the impression that they haven’t changed, eh? You simply tell yourself that reflection is going to help you discover something hidden that you hadn’t seen the first time in the motive. In other words, you make a presentation to yourself: [Deleuze goes to the board, away from the microphone, creating certain audio difficulties] A and B, thus your objectified motives. There you are, and the first operation, you consider them closely. The second operation, you’ve had enough; [Laughter] you move on to something else, you reset your mind, and then you come back to your motives, and because you’ve objectified them, you think that they haven’t changed, eh, [Deleuze sits back down] that this is still A and B. And notice that this is required as a function of your screwed-up schema of A and B. [Pause] But that’s not it at all.
So what’s the truth here? [Pause; Deleuze returns to the board] It’s that between the first iteration and the second one, some time passes by, and the motives have been completely caught up in time, such that your true schema is what? First iteration [Deleuze draws on the board], A, B; second iteration, A prime, B prime. [Deleuze sits back down] From your first iteration to your second iteration, A has become A prime, B has become B prime. In other words, your motives have endured, and by enduring, they have changed. What have I done? What difference is there between the two schemas? I’d say that I have a linear schema and I have a curvilinear schema. I don’t need to make you notice that my second schema is an inflection. [Pause] Leibniz will confirm this by saying, the soul is inclined without being necessitated.[27] But “inclined”, how do we not savor this word that we’ve seen following us from the start with our tales of the inflection? Inclination (inclinaison) of the soul or its preference (inclination), this is the inflection that it traverses in so-called voluntary events. Hence, the two motives haven’t at all remained immobile. They have followed the inflection.
Let’s pass on to the other aspect that will completely confirm this, and then we will have finished. No more than movers (mobiles) [or] motives (motifs) remained identical to themselves from one deliberation to another, no more did they divide into objective motive and inclination since inclination was the very movement of the motive. And what is this movement of this motive? Well, this is obvious. It’s that a motive is not abstract. I made it abstract at first in order to consider it as an object independent from the soul. First error. But I also made it abstract because I cut it off completely, and from what? I’d say, from the cloud surrounding it. Are you rediscovering this topic, the extent to which this is entirely coherent? You already sense that the motive is a singularity as any singularity is surrounded by a cloud according to which it’s going to be able to be prolonged or not.
What is this cloud? I’d really like to go to the café. Fine. But, wanting to go to the café is an abstraction. But Leibniz does, … he’s very, very concrete in what he says. You know, he says, wanting to go to a café – to the inn (auberge), they’d say back then… But consider the case of an alcoholic. We just have to see that it’s not simply about alcohol; it’s an entire dusting (poudroiement), an entire dust [layer] of tiny things: the odor of that place I like, if I am… — this is an alcoholic speaking – the pals he will find there, the noise at the café, the café’s noise that’s without equal, that resembles no other noise, an entire infinite aggregate of tiny solicitations, such that if you don’t take them into account when you speak about an alcoholic, it would be better not to speak at all. One must not say, hey listen, just keep yourself from drinking, ok? [Laughter] It’s not at all about drinking a glass; it’s… People, they don’t understand a thing. It’s a world, it’s a world. And this world, one cannot live one’s there except that the alcoholic who likes it. He lives in this café noise. He lives in that dust in which we walk, half vomit, half spit, half cigarette butts, ashes and fog, and the folds of these ashes and this fog, all that, the voices through the folds, he notices his glass, [saying] ah yes, right. [Laughter] But drinking at home, that’s something completely different. It’s another case, drinking at home. That has no relation with the alcoholic at the café, no relation. And then necessarily, everything depends on the cafés he frequents; there are the local whores there, how are you doing, and all that, it’s great, it’s… One feels… In the end, one feels taken in by a welcoming humanity. Fine, you understand?
But what does that mean? Well, you are going to complete it yourself. It’s not difficult. At each deliberation, I not only have my changing motives that do not stay like weights on a scale, so that [the deliberation] congeals an entire dusting of tiny solicitations, from both sides, in fact, from both sides. At each deliberation, what increases? The amplitude, I’d say, the amplitude of the inflection, that’s what changes, the amplitude of the inflection. What is it to be free ? It’s pushing your motives all the way to the maximum amplitude of which you are capable, that is, to cause them to conglomerate or coagulate the maximum of tiny solicitations passing under your nose. That’s what it is to feed your decision to the point of deciding when… what? When the act you choose expresses your full soul, at the maximum of its amplitude. And if you choose the miserable activity of going to drink a glass at the café, while turning your back on philosophy, what must we say? We must say that, with all your soul, you’ve chosen to be miserable; [Laughter] we have to say that you’ve chosen according to the clear portion of the world that you express. There you are. And if you say, no, no, I am staying in to read Leibniz [Laughter] – you must not believe that this is an abstraction. An abstraction has never had the least chance when faced by something concrete – this is equally concrete, it’s that your soul has a sufficient amplitude so that – call it motive B, reading Leibniz – so that on the side of plan B, this amplitude will be maximum whereas, on the side of plan A, the amplitude will not at all fill up your soul.
So, it’s a matter of your soul. Adam sins, yes; Sextus gets drunk; or else, I don’t know, someone goes and gets drunk. The act is free, but to what extent? To the extent that it expresses the entire amplitude of the soul at the moment he commits the act. So you can always regret that, at that moment, your region – as this happens a lot – what’s awful is when… These are daily variations. There’s an hour, for example, there’s an hour in which the greatest of philosophers tells himself, ah, if I had only gone and met Julot at the café to discuss things for a bit. Fine. There are moments in which his soul has this tiny amplitude, and that expresses his soul. At that moment, he must go to the café; “must” is sad to say, but… [Laughter; pause] since it’s the act that expresses the amplitude of his soul at that moment.
Or else then, there’s another solution fortunately. No, he doesn’t have to. It’s probable [he will], but he doesn’t have to, he doesn’t have to. He only has to bide his time (gagner du temps). He only has to bide some time since all these desires animated by the tiny solicitations of which we aren’t even conscious – it’s these unconscious solicitations that crisscross us from everywhere, the memory, no, not the memory, the noise that I like, the kind of noise that I like, all that – well then, that changes greatly according to the stage of the day. For example, alcohol, digestives, all that filth, it’s like at certain hours of the day, there are certain hours that are especially difficult. If you manage to pass beyond that moment – I’m not saying this for every case, but for alcohol, its periodic character is particularly clear – if you manage to bide your time, one has to bide one’s time with what one likes. We have such bad faith, we are so wretched (crapuleux) that we have to play tricks, right? We have to play tricks with our soul. If you gain a bit of time, good, that will cause your soul to open itself toward the other amplitude in the meantime, and where there isn’t the same problem. You’ll say, oh right, it’s too late; I should have gone out earlier. This method is infallible. Whatever the object is of your decision to be taken, apply this method of the soul’s amplitude. Never regret what you’ve done at a moment when your soul’s amplitude was particularly limited. You’ll get over it (Tant pis). Regret only not having an adequate amplitude of the soul. Work to increase the amplitude of your soul in whatever way you can. I don’t at all say that it’s only philosophy that succeeds, but it’s certain that, for example… [Interruption of the recording] [142:24]
… a null amplitude, even in cafés, even in the cafés that I just described, there are strange things, and in a certain manner, there arise strange moments of generosity and understanding, and almost sometimes beauty; other times, no… no. All that, all that, it’s up to you to lead your life, but manage yourself or lead it in the manner of Leibniz.
And on that note, go on out to the café, [Pause] and I will return to this after vacation since perhaps you’ve heard me: have you been struck by this, that another philosopher has taken up some themes extremely close [to these] and yet doesn’t usually connect them, and that other philosopher is Bergson, in his theory of freedom?
Good… Oo là là.. What time is it? … [Various noises; a student asks a question about motives and movers (mobiles)] Leibniz says them, but they come down to the same thing, these are motive and inclination. Movers are still in the order of the motive, whereas the motive is in the order of inclination, if you will; it’s tiny perceptions and motives that Leibniz distinguishes, whereas movers, that … [End of the session] [2:24:04]

Lecture 10, 24 February 1987: Principles and Freedom (5) – The Tavern — Motives, the Soul & Damnation, Towards Progress 
Part 1
Richard Pinhas: … of infinite harmony and of finite harmony. So the idea was to put into musical staves the signs that we [coughing blocks several words] … So I create the staves, I explain the signs, I explain the logical signs, the musical signs, I assign a chord which corresponds either to finitude or to infinity, and we see that the symbols distributed by registers correspond exactly to what we could do for a musical staff. So, I didn’t develop it, I’ve provided the diagram in a way to try to formulate it analogically. So I create the staves [He moves to the board and begins to draw for several minutes while speaking about the staves, developing the modulation of infinite harmony (what Deleuze calls “variation”) in successive measures and also finite modulation] [1:00-5:00]
[5:17] … the chord representing, on the one hand, infinite variation, pre-established harmony, and the possibility of a complete chromatic a priori which would therefore be a kind of variation on infinity, represented graphically and chromatically by this musical chord, by the formula of … [jump in the recording], by simple repetition … [jump in the recording] with a non-finite bar of music, because if there is a finite bar of music, we have the symbol of simple repetition, therefore of a finite repetition, the symbol of the subject or the monad, and a finite chord. There we are. [6:00] Next time, [jump in the recording, some words lost]
Deleuze: And the relationship between one and the other?
Pinhas: So, the relationship is in relation, I would say, it is in relation to formalization and exclusion because if you have… if you develop the side… I started from this, that if you develop a formula of the infinity and a formula of finitude, you realize that in music, there is a formula that can be embodied by this type of chord… [unclear words] which means that we have in the formulation of certain types of chords, of certain types of chromatic rises, for example, or of certain varieties which are at the limit of harmony, we have something which corresponds exactly to infinity in Leibniz. Whereas in the opposite case, we have exactly, I wouldn’t say the opposite, we have the same thing [7:00], but in the case of finitude, and this is found in the development by the coda and by the possibility of repetition to infinity, as opposed to a simple repetition which occurs in finite repetition, and which would block us within the framework of finitude. [Pause] So, well, the most important thing will be to develop this part in relation to that one, and this is what we will do in two or three directions, in the case of pre-established harmony.
Deleuze: There has to be a third stave.
Pinhas: Yes, that would be a fractal infinity…
Deleuze: No, this stave is material [la matière]… [Deleuze and Pinhas speak simultaneously and over each other for a moment]
Pinhas: It’s going to be included in the development of that one.
Deleuze: But it is its own law, its own harmonic law.
Pinhas: Yes, but I think it’s a detail. Everything that will be harmony, partial harmony, everything that… [8:00], everything that will concern harmony in music is part of [unclear words] of these formulas, and that is what we thought about developing it.
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, you’ll have to keep this [Pinhas’s project].
Pinhas: The program can be kept in musical form.
Deleuze: Yeh, yeh, yeh, so you will have to hold on to this. The ideal thing would be for it to be performed… [Pause]
Pinhas: I will keep that for another day.
Deleuze: … so that you might create an orchestration of it. [Pause] So, good, you’re ready? [Pause] [The WebDeleuze site transcription commences here]
So you recall perhaps that we had begun to examine what Leibniz had to tell us about freedom, specifically and more precisely our own freedom. I no longer know, I began quite a while ago, so I will quickly take up again the problem as it presents itself. What he tells us is extremely concrete. I hope that since then, as I requested, you have read and re-read Bergson, and I would like us to reach the most concrete conception possible. You recall perhaps how the problem presents itself: it’s that at the level of propositions of existence, it is not at all contradictory that Adam would no longer be a sinner. It is not contradictory that Adam no longer sins. An Adam non-sinner, we saw, was a theme that we followed at length, an Adam non-sinner, a Caesar not crossing the Rubicon, are not impossible, they are simply incompossible with the world that God had chosen. Fine. Henceforth we will say: it is not necessary that Caesar cross the Rubicon; it is certain that Caesar will cross the Rubicon or crosses the Rubicon. It is certain, and why? As a function of the chosen world, since “crossing the Rubicon” is a predicate or event, as Leibniz said, a predicate or event included in the monad Caesar. So it is certain that Caesar will cross the Rubicon, but finally that does not mean that this is necessary since another Caesar was possible. Yes, but he was possible in another world, and this world is incompossible with ours. I told you all that is fine, but it concerns the freedom of whom? Of what?[2]
At the extreme, I can say that this story, this distinction of the certain and the necessary concerns God’s freedom. It amounts to saying, in fact, that God chooses between worlds and that there is a freedom of God in creation. But my own freedom, in this world, Caesar’s freedom in this world, it’s nonetheless a rather feeble consolation to tell oneself: well yes, I could have done something different than what I did, but in another world, and this other world is incompossible with the first, and anyway, that would have been a different self. And Leibniz says it himself: a Caesar who does not cross the Rubicon is another self. So we came to this with our question, what we want and we will not let go of Leibniz’s texts so long as we do not have an answer: and what about our own freedom, in this world and without reference to other incompossible worlds? And in fact, Leibniz distinguishes the problems rather well, and to my knowledge, there is only – we cannot engage with Leibniz – it’s very curious how most of Leibniz’s texts that pose the question of freedom bifurcate on [the question of] God’s freedom, and are content to tell us: well ok, you see, [the fact] that we are doing this, no doubt it’s certain, but it [God’s freedom] is not necessary. Once again, the theme “certain, but not necessary” obviously does not constitute my freedom in the world but founds and constitutes God’s freedom in light of the plurality of possible worlds. I told you: fortunately, there are two texts that do not bifurcate on God’s freedom, one long and the other short, a little text taken from the correspondence with [Samuel] Clarke [Deleuze spells out the name], Clarke being a disciple of Newton, and on the other hand, a long, admirable text in the New Essays on Human Understanding, book 2, chapters 20 and 21, in which it is fully a question of our own freedom, yours, mine, Caesar’s, Adam’s, etc. And if we try to delve carefully, we see clearly – it’s what I said the last time, it’s the first great phenomenology of motives (motifs).
It’s on a phenomenology of motives that Leibniz is going to establish his conception of freedom; in which form? In the form of our freedom? By truly denouncing a double illusion, a double illusion concerning motives. Leibniz tells us, first of all: we cannot understand anything about freedom, we can grasp nothing about human freedom if we conceive of motives like weights on the pans of a scale, which is the same as saying: don’t objectify motives, don’t make motives into something that would be outside the mind, or even inside the mind as objective representations. Motives are neither objects, nor representations of objects; they are not weights on a scale through which you could ascertain which has import over the other, given all conditions being equal in your mind. So, first danger: objectifying motives, treating them like weights on a scale. In other words, it’s the mind that creates motives, your mind that makes them motives. If you prefer, motives are profiles of the mind, dispositions of the soul as [Leibniz] said in the correspondence with Clarke. [Pause] Second illusion: this would be dividing motives (dédoubler les motifs), no longer the illusion of objectifying, but the illusion of dividing, and this second illusion is triggered by the first. If you have made motives into weights on a scale, that is, if you have objectified them, you are forced to invoke new subjective motives that will explain why you chose certain motives rather than certain other ones. In other words, if you objectify motives, you are forced to divide them since you will need another rank of subjective motives to explain your choice of objective motives. In other words, you will fall into the stupid idea that one must desire to desire (vouloir vouloir). You will need subjective dispositions in order to choose one or another of the objective dispositions.[3]
Henceforth, what does this mean? One cannot desire to desire, that is, motives are not divisible. They are not divisible because motives are not objective or objectifiable. And in fact, they are the very fabric of the soul. What does this mean, the fabric of the soul? Leibniz explains to us, about what composes the fabric of the soul, [that] we must not believe just like that the soul is a kind of scale awaiting weights to be placed on it. The fabric of the soul is a teeming (fourmillement), a teeming of tiny inclinations – hold on to the word “inclination” because we will have another word later that resembles it, but that will not be the same – a teeming of tiny inclinations that – to return again to our theme, this is not a metaphor – that plies, that plies the soul in every direction, a teeming of tiny inclinations. Later, we will see this, once we have devoted at least an entire session to the topic, to what is a fundamental theme in Leibniz, what Leibniz will call tiny perceptions and tiny inclinations.
You recall the base of the monad which is a drapery (tapis), which is draped, but at the same time, this draping (tapisserie) forms folds.[4] You will rediscover the same theme, the fabric of the soul, teeming, that is, with folds that appear and disappear at every instant. A multiplicity. A multiplicity of tiny tendencies, of tiny perceptions. Very good. It’s this fabric of the soul, this multiplicity that belongs to it which – you recall [that] the New Essays reconsider a book by Locke entitled Essays on Human Understanding, — and it’s this fabric of the soul that Leibniz, on his own, is going to designate by using a word introduced by Locke, specifically the word “disquiet” (inquiétude). He will say that what Locke calls disquiet is precisely this teeming that never ceases at any moment, as if (chapter 20, book 2) a thousand little springs. You recall at the very beginning, the theme of the constant spring (resort) in Leibniz as a function of elastic force. If the force is elastic, then things are as if moved by little springs. Here we rediscover the thousand little springs. In other words, you never cease teeming. And it’s as if this kind of living fabric of the soul never ceased being plied not in one direction or the other, that’s saying too much, but in every direction. It’s a kind of itching. Disquiet is an itching. The soul is perpetually in a state of itching. And Leibniz tells us, in a very lovely text, it’s the balance wheel (or pendulum), and in German, the balance wheel is called precisely: disquiet![5] That is, it’s no longer an objective balance wheel. What does that mean?
I return to an example, perhaps attempting to develop it a bit, to derive the maximum from it, in chapter 21, book 2, of New Essays, the same example he gives: the tavern. And I was trying to complete it for it to be clear. He tells us — you understand, I misspoke,[6] I think, because I said “going to a café,” which is completely misplaced in the seventeenth century, it was a mistake that you corrected since they went to the tavern. So I am going to the tavern. Typical example of human freedom! Am I going to stay and work, am I going to stay and teach the course, or am I going to the tavern? We’ll have to see. One must understand. There are people who tell you: fine, you are going to assimilate the tavern, weight A, and remaining at work, weight B, and you will see if, all things being equal, but precisely nothing is ever equal in my soul. That would presume that my soul precisely was not in a state of disquiet. Henceforth, the misunderstandings multiply. For at the same time that one lends an objective existence to motives, as if they were weights on a scale, and one bathes the soul of all of its disquiet, as if it were a neutral scale ready to register the weight of the weights. This is unreasonable. In fact, the fabric of my soul, in this precise moment, in this moment A, is made of what? I say: a thousand tiny perceptions, a thousand tiny inclinations that go from what to what? In the distance I hear. I hear what? I hear… Is this my imagination, is it? In any case, it’s an aggregate of tiny perceptions and tiny inclinations.
What do I hear in the distance? I hear the clinking of glasses, I hear the conversation of friends, and if not, I imagine them. There is no cause for thinking that at the level of tiny perceptions, certainly in the domains where [there’s] imagining and perceiving, [that] it’s important to be distinguished them; at the level of tiny perceptions, it’s less certain, [but] in any case, it’s not our problem. You already see why motives are never weights placed on the scale, he tells us: but you understand, an alcoholic understands a thousand times better than anyone – while Leibniz nonetheless led a sober and exemplary life, but he understands quite well – an alcoholic is not at all someone who lives in the abstract, it’s not at all someone whose soul is turned toward alcohol, alcohol, as if alcohol were the sole weight capable of acting on this scale. But alcohol is strictly inseparable from an entire teeming context: auditory, gustatory, that goes without saying, but auditory and visual, the company of companions in debauchery, joyous and witty conversations that relieve me of my solitude, all that. If you posit an alcohol aggregate (ensemble alcool), one has to include not only alcohol, but all sorts of qualities, visual, auditory, olfactory, the odor of the tavern, all that. But on the other hand, here one also has to consider it a perceptive inclinatory aggregate (ensemble perceptif inclinatoire), tiny perceptions inclinations: the sound of paper, it’s also the auditory, the quality of silence, pages that I turn, the sound of the pen. All of that is hardly neutral. I mean, just as this was not alcohol as abstraction, it’s [also] not work as abstraction. It’s an entire perceptive-inclination aggregate (ensemble perceptivo-inclinatoire ). [Pause]
What does the question of deliberation mean? It’s understood that the fabric of my soul goes from one pole to the other, at a precise moment. It thus goes from the perceptive pole established in the tavern to this perceptive pole established in the work space. And my soul is crisscrossed with tiny perceptions and tiny inclinations that ply it in every direction. Deliberated, toward which side am I going to fold my soul? Toward which side? That is, toward which side am I going to integrate, to use a pseudo-mathematical term, toward which side am I going to integrate the tiny perceptions and tiny inclinations? Or if you prefer: toward which side am I going to fold my soul, means toward which am I going to produce, with all the corresponding tiny inclinations, an inclination, no, rather a remarkable inclination, toward which side am I going to produce every tiny perception possible, a distinctive perception? To produce with a maximum of tiny perceptions a distinctive perception, with a maximum of tiny inclinations, a remarkable inclination, that is, with all the tiny folds that twist my soul at every instant, and which constitute my disquiet, with what and toward which side am I going to make a decisive fold, a deciding fold (un pli décisoire)? [Pause] In other words, [Pause] what is the action that, at a moment [being] considered, will fill my soul following its amplitude? Hence the perpetual term of balance wheel or pendulum: the pendulum as amplitude of the soul at such and such a moment.[7] [Pause]
As a result, as I was telling you, what is essential, in chapter 20, you are going to find a splendid formula: in the meantime, the scale changed. We can’t say it better. The scale changed, it’s the little drawing that I proposed to you the last time. [Deleuze goes to the board] Here I am going to attempt a bad drawing. You recall that this bad drawing; it’s to believe that I have an upstanding soul (âme tout droite) that finds itself in front of a bifurcation: Motive A, going to the tavern; motive B, to stay and work. This schema is stupid and has all kinds of problems: the motives are objectified, my soul is assumed to be straightforward and indifferent, and in order to choose, it has to have motives upon motives (des motifs de motifs). This schema of deliberation, this phenomenology of deliberation is not reasonable and not serious. Why? Because when I deliberate, am I going to the tavern…, no, it’s more reasonable to work… I work a bit and then I say: I still want to go to the tavern. [Laughter] I return to A. What is so idiotic about this schema? What’s idiotic in the schema is that when I return to A, I act as if it’s the same as the last time. It’s obviously not the same. Between the two moments, the motive has changed. First moment: I am going to the tavern. Second moment: no, I will keep on working. Third moment: but what if I went out anyway? But the second A is not the first for the simple reason that B has occurred between the two. The absurdity of assimilating motives as if they were weights on the scale is that in that moment, the motives remain constant in the deliberation.
Henceforth we do not really see how one could arrive at any decision whatsoever since if one reaches a decision through deliberation, it’s really to the extent that, in the course of the deliberation, the motives do not at all remain constant. They have changed, why? Simply because time has passed. It’s duration that causes motives to change, or rather, it doesn’t cause motives to change, it causes change to the extent that the nature of the considered motive endures. Following which I told you, that’s its true figure… There you have the only possible schema of deliberation.[8] A — so we’re presenting this with the same values – A is the tavern, B is work. It’s a schema of inflection. Once again, we rediscover the thread of our story. There are only inflections in the soul. What will the inflection of the soul be? It receives its name: inclination! What does being free mean for us? It means being inclined without being necessitated. Motives incline me without making necessity for me. The inclination of the soul is the inflection in the soul, inflection such  that it’s included. The entire first part of the trimester supports this.
So I continue. A = tavern, B = work. All of us knowing that motives change, there is no A and no B. There is A prime, B prime, [Deleuze is drawing], A double prime, B double prime, C triple prime… Ah no [Laughter] A triple prime, B triple prime, A four times, B quadruple prime, etc. .. Is that ok?
You see that when I deliberate, for example, I don’t at all return to A. It’s not the same A. So, why stop in all this at one moment, and why even have deliberated, why? The free act will be the one that activates the amplitude of my soul at a given moment, in the moment that I act. You will tell me, but that’s always the case. No! Why? You recall, it’s a question of integrating the tiny perceptions and tiny inclinations in order to obtain a remarkable inclination, the inclination of the soul. That which is able or not of filling the inclination of the soul at a given moment is a remarkable inclination. To integrate the tiny perceptions requires Time, and in all of Leibniz’s philosophy – and I believe that it’s only later that we can understand the problem of Time in Leibniz only when it will happen to us later – I think that perpetually in Leibniz this theme intervenes, the kind of leitmotif: it’s something that requires time. It’s symbolic and exemplary; we will get there today if we have time, to reach the problem of the regime of light. The rupture or one of the fundamental ruptures is – as all the manuals say – Descartes believed in the instantaneity of the transmission of light. Integration, fundamentally, takes time. And if it’s mathematical integration, it will be a mathematical time, and if it’s psychic integration, it will be a psychic time.
So, let’s say… Let’s pursue this. I started off from A prime, that is, I have a vague desire to go to the tavern. B, why don’t I go there? Simply because that remains in the state of tiny inclination, tiny perception, it teems, yes, I want to. But I am at work. The question is: I don’t know what the amplitude of my soul is at that moment, I need time. Can I wait? Often I cannot wait, so I rush down to the tavern. [Laughter] Could I have waited? I could have waited, but it would no longer have been the same me. Then, very often, I commit an act that does not at all respond to the amplitude of my soul, I even spend my time in that. Each time that I commit a machine-like act that does not at all respond to the amplitude of my soul: when I shave in the morning, that does not respond to the amplitude of my soul, but let’s not exaggerate! [Laughter] There is no reason, as certain philosophers do, to submit every act that we commit to the criterion: is it free or not! Freedom is for certain acts. There are all sorts of acts that don’t have to be confronted with the problems of freedom. [Pause] We commit them only when…  I would say, uniquely to calm the disquiet, all these mechanical acts, all the habitual acts, etc. … We will speak of freedom only there where the question arises of an act able or not to fill the amplitude of the soul at a given moment. And I would say: an act is free if it effectively fills the amplitude of the soul at a given moment.
Let us assume that at moment A, the maximum of amplitude is on the side of A prime, which is more ample than B, that is, going to the tavern, since going to the tavern implies an amplitude of the soul, it’s not by pure narrowness; it opens itself onto all that I said: joining up with one’s friends, joyful conversations, the wittiest of jokes the likes of which one rarely hears, etc. … (Laughter) But can I wait? And you will see chapters 20 and 21 [of the New Essays] are full of the question, can one wait? We can conceive of anything. If Adam could have waited, if Adam could have waited… [Interruption of the BNF recording, gap 1] [47:47] would he have sinned?… And I tell myself, let’s wait, let’s wait a bit, and I hold myself back. [End of gap 1]
Part 2
… And the moment after — not immediately after because this is a concrete problem, the question of waiting, being able to wait — and then, to a certain extent, the world has changed, the problem no longer is posed in the same way. There are cases where one cannot wait; there are cases when one mustn’t wait; there are cases where waiting changes everything. So there, [Deleuze taps the chalk on the board], you see that here, my soul has gained in amplitude, and it’s toward the side of working, and there, my soul has again gained in amplitude, but it’s on the tavern side. This suggests to what extent it’s never the same motive; when I return to the same motive, it’s not the same motive. Why? Some time has passed. Between A second and A third, some time has passed, some time has passed that we call duration. So if you tell me, ok, why not stop at A second, I would then answer, maybe this, maybe that (tantôt, tantôt). Maybe I stop at the second, maybe I don’t stop. According to what? Maybe because A second, at a given moment, activates the supposed amplitude of my soul as if the mechanical act took it over. Moreover, you can invert the schema to no longer have a progressive process like I did there, but a regressive process in which my pseudo-spiral, on the contrary, will narrow, the amplitude will decrease. You have series in which the amplitude of the soul decreases. You understand?
Fine, [Deleuze returns to his seat] so this will perhaps work itself out in any event. This has to be very concrete. It comes down to saying that the free act is that which expresses the entire soul at a given moment of duration; the free act is one that fills all the amplitude of the soul at a given moment of duration; it’s one that expresses the whole soul at a given moment of duration; in other words, it’s one that expresses the moi [self, ego]. [Pause] It’s the perfect or completed act whatever it might be. It is perfect or complete insofar as it expresses the moi. Ha, good! It expresses the moi, it is perfect and complete. There we stumble onto something that is going to be quite important, philosophically, vitally, everything I mean. It’s the perfect or completed act. The perfect or completed act is a very well know notion in philosophy, so it has a Greek name, but its Greek name sounds strange, it’s Entelechia. [Deleuze spells it out] in the French transcription, Entelechia, that Aristotle spoke about quite a bit. Here I do not have the time to talk to you about Entelechia in Aristotle, but in fact, it’s the act that has its end in itself, that is, the perfect or completed act, and in Aristotle’s philosophy, it’s the permanent act, it’s an act endowed with permanence in opposition to the successive act. [Pause] In other words, the perfect or completed act, already in Aristotle, it’s not the act once done, it’s not in the past. And nonetheless, this story is very complicated, because Entelechia manifests itself in the very special Greek verb form of the aorist, and which is a tense that has something to do with the past, but that is, if you will, what we call the perfect. The perfect. But let us be aware that reducing the perfect to the past would be entirely insufficient, even for Aristotle, and would even be a contradiction.
Let’s forget Aristotle and return to Leibniz. For Leibniz, it’s obvious; it’s much more obvious. The perfect act is the act that expresses the soul following its entire amplitude, following the entire amplitude of the soul. It’s the act that expresses the moi; this act is an act in the present. I would like to return without tiring myself out and without always tiring you out too much on this, because this appears to me completely forgotten or neglected by commentators, the importance of the present in all of Leibniz’s philosophy, the act of the present, the action in the present. You recall that when it was a question of showing what inclusion consisted of, Leibniz always starts from the act in the process of being done, not the act done. “I write”, in the Monadology, that is, I am in the process of writing; in the Letters to Arnauld, “I travel,” I am in the process of traveling. [Pause] This is very important since at first glance, it would seem that inclusion in the monad is the domain of past acts. No, not at all. Past acts are included in the monad only because the present act should be it. It’s because the present act “I write” is included in the monad that, henceforth, the causes for which I write, that is the past givens, are also included. Inclusion is closing off (fermature): the monad encloses its own predicates, it closes in its predicates. What is essential is that cloture or closure, that is, inclusion, is the correspondent of the present act in the process of being committed and not past acts. Inclusion is the condition of the living present, and it’s not the condition of the dead past. Ha, good, we have seen this. But now what we discover here, for me, is very important because it’s all of Leibniz that changes, in my opinion. Suddenly you must grasp that inclusion is fully in the process of being reconciled with freedom. It’s because misinterpretations have been created about inclusion; some say, ha, inclusion means one includes everything in the manner of the already done. It’s as if before having crossed it, Caesar had already crossed the Rubicon. At that moment, a misinterpretation has occurred. Once someone says this, there has been a contradiction. Inclusion is the correspondent of the act in the process of being committed; it’s the condition of the act in the process of occurring, and not at all the result of the act once done. It’s not past acts that fall into the monad, it’s the act in the process of occurring that could have occurred if, at the same time it is done, it wasn’t inscribed in the monad, if it wasn’t included in the monad to be committed while it’s occurring. Why?
But then, what? Why? Why? Because, listen well: it’s because the present act can be perfect only provided that what? Provided that its own movement has a unity. What defines the perfection of the act isn’t that it occurred, it’s that the movement through which it takes place has a unity. [Pause] A unity of movement in the act of being accomplished is necessary. [Pause] So there, what gives unity to a movement? The movement by itself? No, it’s a pure relative, relativity of the movement. What gives a unity to the movement is the soul, the soul of the movement. Only the soul is the unity of the movement. Otherwise, if you limit yourself to the body, you can just as well attribute a movement to body A as to body B. There is an absolute relativity of the movement. Only the soul is capable of giving a unity to the movement. Fine.
What is the perfect act? You will understand perhaps: the perfect act is the act that receives from the soul that includes it in the unity of a movement in the process of occurring. That’s to tell you to what extent the perfect act is not an act over and done (une fois fait), quite the contrary. It’s the present act, the act that’s occurring, but that receives from the soul the unity of a movement in the process of occurring, that receives from the soul the necessary unity. Under what condition does it receive this unity? Under the condition of being included in the soul, of being included in the present. Hence, a new definition – I am concluding before asking you if you understand well — a new definition of the free act; I was telling you earlier — and be attentive to this as it’s really the same thing, we are passing from one definition to the other in continuous fashion — I was saying first: the free act is the act that expresses the moi, that is, that expresses the soul in all its amplitude at a moment of the duration, and I am saying now that the free act is that which received from the soul which includes it, it’s the present act, which includes it in present fashion, it’s the present act that receives from the soul that includes it the unity of a movement in the process of occurring. [Pause]
And note that I can recommence: certainly, in the course of the day, it’s rare that I commit free acts. The question of freedom poses itself at the level of importance. When I have something to do that matters to me, yes there, the question of my liberty concerns me. Otherwise, I spend my time committing acts… Fine. That has no importance that my movement might have unity. Very rare are the acts in which it is important that they receive from the soul the unity of a movement in the process of occurring. Otherwise, there are all sorts of movements that take place all alone: walking, crossing the street, all that, and then suddenly, there is a moment in which I need some soul. I don’t need it constantly, first, because it’s tiring these stories of the amplitude of the soul. I don’t know if you sense that you have an ample soul! Why have an ample soul, after all, I haven’t told you yet. Why not be happy having a tiny little amplitude? There are lots of people who are happy with a tiny little amplitude, but they will commit free acts from the moment that actions that they commit in the present receive the unity of a movement in the process of occurring, that is, from the moment that their actions express the amplitude of their soul whatever it might be.
So, at the point we have reached, we need to stop and say: Have a soul with even a tiny little amplitude, simply find the actions that correspond to this amplitude, and you will be free men (des hommes libres). In other words, what is threatened in Leibniz, is not freedom, it’s morality, since saying to people “Have a soul as narrow as you like, you will be free from the moment that you commit acts in the present that express this amplitude, so get drunk at the tavern as much as you want, [Laughter] if that’s what corresponds to the amplitude of your soul”, — you understand that this isn’t what one expects from a philosopher who has called for morality in morals (la moralité des moeurs), this is the story of the present in Leibniz. I think that you know that one of the most difficult theories in Leibniz is the theory of time, and so here, we are laying out the steps for the future when we arrive at this problem of time in Leibniz. And whether the free act is in the present, whether it is fundamentally in the present, appears to me extremely important. Whether the amplitude of the soul is variable in the order of time, all that is a reality of time as duration that is extremely important.
So the act in the present, good, is this understood or not? What I would like you to understand is two themes: The perfect or complete act is not a completed act, not an act over and done. But the perfect or complete act is that act that receives from the soul that includes it the unity of the act in the process of occurring. Third point, which is the conclusion: don’t think that inclusion assimilates the acts into acts always and already past; on the contrary, inclusion is the condition of production of the present act insofar as it is present (en tant que present). … Yeah? (Ouais!)
A student: [Inaudible question from the back of the room]
Deleuze: Duration can even occur, it can introduce a narrowing, yes, absolutely. [Pause] And you are perhaps going to understand everything if you take into account an extraordinary theory of Leibniz, one of the most beautiful theories, and we shouldn’t say theory at this level, but it’s a veritable practice that concerns a problem which we all care about, specifically the problem of damnation.[9] The damned. What is someone who is damned? Or if you prefer: are the damned free? And I appeal to you greatly to show respect for a discipline [that] today has disappeared, specifically theology. Theology survives somewhat, but it has become a physical science. But in the old days, in the seventeenth century still, I am not talking about before, theology understands what it was. Why is there such an alliance between philosophy and theology? It’s not simply because of God, not the stories of God that fuse the theology-philosophy alliance; it’s much more beautiful than that in any case. It’s that theology is an extraordinary logic, an extraordinary logic; moreover, I think that there would not be any possible logic without theology. Why?
Because… that seems obvious to me because, today, we are told that we know that there is no logic without paradox, no logic without paradox; certain famous paradoxes even, in Bertrand Russell, have been the basis for… and others, not only Russell, are at the basis for the construction of modern logic. But this situation of a fundamental linkage (noeud) between logic and paradox did not at all arise just recently. Simply put, before [logic] it was theology that furnished logic with its absolutely necessary paradoxical material. In what form? The Trinity, three persons in one, transubstantiation, the body of Christ and the bread, whatever you want, the resurrection, the resurrection of bodies. But understand, this paradoxical material is inseparable from a pure logic. They don’t need to find it in a theory of aggregates in the seventeenth century because they don’t know it, but that’s not why. Theology is more fertile in paradoxes than mathematics. [Pause] And if theology has such an intense life, it’s because it fills this role. It’s true that these paradoxes aren’t without danger since for very little, one gets oneself condemned and even worse, burned. One has to recall that it’s not outmoded at the time of Leibniz’s writings, it’s not outmoded yet, since one of the last great burnings was [Giordano] Bruno who had a great importance for Leibniz. But in the end, these were rather dangerous paradoxes, more dangerous than actual paradoxes, although getting insulted by Wittgenstein isn’t fun, [Laughter] but better that than getting burned alive. I understand that Wittgenstein doesn’t seem to me to be a source of paradoxes, but rather a kind of grand inquisitor. All that is awful, you know? I would like to… But no, we don’t have time, but hold on to the possibility of the fundamental link between logic and theology. I believe that theology is the natural material for logic up to a certain period, up to the eighteenth century. And it’s there, the fundamental theology-philosophy alliance, and it’s not enough to invoke the idea of God to tell us: hah, at that moment. Nothing at all at that moment! If you want theology, it’s exactly for philosophy what the crucifixion was for a painter. I don’t mean that they did not believe in God, I don’t mean that at all, but I mean they didn’t believe only in God, and if they believe in God, it’s for reasons, in fact, that are closely linked to the logic of the paradox. Fine.
Which is why I say, let’s not believe that this is an old problem in returning to this question, but what is someone who is damned after all? And Leibniz creates an extraordinary theory of damnation in which I dare not attribute everything to him. One has to be very, very knowledgeable, one has to ask a church father, a specialist, someone very learned, who might have read the theologians of the era. Leibniz does not hide himself borrowing greatly from theologians of the era, for not only are there all the paradoxes, but there is casuistry.  The two appurtenances (appartenances) from theology to philosophy or to logic are this double aspect: paradox and casuistry. The case. For example, a case: if it’s a saint who asks that a damned person be absolved of the sanction, does this mean one can conceive of a damned person ceasing to be such? Or is this eternally, is damnation eternal? You might say to me, oh really? But this is really important!
So I am also saying here [that] in two kinds of texts, Leibniz takes on the question of damnation. First, in the Theodicy, where he goes so far as to announce that the damned are free, as free as are happy souls (les bienheureux), but the text isn’t clear; and in another text where he develops a whole admirable theory of damnation. Understand that this is not foreign to the Baroque, an entire theory of damnation, and this text is called Confessio philosofi in Latin, that is, in French: Profession du foi du philosophe [The Philosopher’s Confession], and was translated by [Yvon] Belaval, a beautiful translation in fact, published by Vrin Editions. It’s a little text of forty pages or so, very lovely, and we learn all about damnation. And why do I return to all of this? Because it intersects really with our problem at a precise spot, since we might be given to believe that the damned person pays for an abominable act he committed. But actually no; Leibniz’s grand idea is that the damned person pays for no abominable act committed; damnation is in the present, and there is only damnation in the present. So it matters little whether it’s a matter of a theological problem, and it’s in this sense that the damned are free, damnation must be understood in the present.
Fine, we will try to understand this, but one might as well circle around this idea as it’s quite lovely. But suddenly aren’t we in the process of determining – so we are making a brief parenthesis here, if only to recoup some energy – aren’t we in the process of rediscovering a constant about what might well be called the Baroque? [Pause] What I have just discussed, the unity of movement in the process of being created, the soul as unity of movement in the process of being created, that’s what the Baroque is. Who was it that proposed, before the Baroque, grasping the movement of point of view of a unity as in the process of being created? The theme of a movement in the process of being created and grasped while alive, in so far as it is created and in so far as it receives its unity from the soul, all that doesn’t go at all without saying, and it’s really a Baroque vision. We have often noticed that Baroque painting precisely never stops grasping movement in the process of being created, even if it’s death. It’s with the Baroque that painters begin to paint the saints insofar as they feel, in so far as they directly undergo their martyrdom, the unity of death as movement in the process of being created or death in movement.
It’s Jean Rousset in his book on Baroque literature in France,[10] in which a chapter is entitled “Death in Movement” to define the Baroque, that is, death as movement in the process of being created. And he quotes a very beautiful text by an author that everyone considers as one of the great Baroque writers, Quevedo, a beautiful text on death: [Deleuze look for the quote] “You don’t know death, you others”, it’s death speaking, and says: “You know, you represent me as a skeleton, you just aren’t reasonable; I am not a skeleton,” death says. Why? You see the importance of Quevedo’s text for us, from the point of view where we place ourselves. I am not a skeleton, me, death; that is, the skeleton is what I leave behind me, it’s the over and done with, it’s death entirely completed, it’s death… Let’s try to say a word that will serve us later, perhaps it is symbolic death, but since Walter Benjamin, everyone knows that the Baroque is never defined by the symbol, but by allegory. The skeleton is perhaps a symbol of death, [but] it’s not an allegory of death. Besides, it’s curious, I think, and I am not speaking in Benjamin’s name, I think that allegory is always in the present. The skeleton is always death over and done with, but death is death as movement in the process of being created. You don’t know death, you people – it’s a beautiful text – and you are your death, you yourself are your death. You are all your very own dead! (Vous êtes tous les morts de vous-mêmes!) You understand, it’s with your flesh, it’s not with your miserable skeleton which appears only once everything is over; it’s you in your present. Death is neither past nor future. The Classical age since Epicurus tells us that death is either past or future, so what do you have to complain about? … [End of the BNF recording, gap 2][11]
If you are dead, well, that’s it, and if you are waiting for it and it hasn’t yet arrived, what are you… Stop your whining! But no, the Baroque will say, you understand nothing because you consider the movement already to have been completed. [End of gap 2]
Part 3
… If you consider the movement in the process of being created, and that death like all things is a movement in the process of being created. You are all dead yourselves. Your skull is death, but understand well, your skull – not the skin removed, not the hairy covering removed – your skull that you touch, that you tap, that’s what death is. Your face, your face is death.[12] “What you call dying is completing life, and what you call being born is beginning to die, as what you also call living is dying while living. And the bones, it is what death leaves you and what remains in the coffin” — this is the over and done with (le une fois fait) — “if you understood that well, each of you would have, every day, a mirror of death in itself, and you would also see at the same time that all your houses are full of the dead. That there are as many dead as there are the living, and that you do not expect death, but you accompany it perpetually.” This cannot be said any better, movement in the process of being created! You don’t expect death, but you accompany it perpetually, death as movement in the process of being created. And once again, the movement in the process of being created requires a unity, this unity that can only be received from the soul.
But the hour has come, damnation, death is in the present, even death is in the present, even damnation is in the present. And why? Because, you know that the damned man, yet again, does not pay for an act that he has committed; the damned pays for his very own present. Which is another way of saying: he does not inherit damnation, he accompanies it. Why? Leibniz tells us something very odd; he says: What do I call a damned man (damné)?  Here’s where my competence is lacking because obviously, in my opinion, he does not invent it. I’ll read you the text, it’s so beautiful; what does he call a damné? I am going to read the text. — I think I’ve lost it…. Oh here we are –: “Judas. What does Judas’s damnation consist of? At first glance the answer is it’s for having betrayed Christ. Not at all. We can even conceive of someone who might have done worse” — here I’m moving forward, — “and who isn’t damned. In my opinion, Adam is not damned.”[13] I tell myself, in the end, that this could be argued, or else it’s a universal opinion… Do you know, Kirsten?
Kirsten: [Inaudible response]
Deleuze: You’re sure? He [Adam] is damned? You’re very sure? [sûr sûr?]
So let’s correct [ourselves]. We can conceive of [this], and surely certain theologians were burned for that, for having conceived that Adam was not damned, for – or one has to identify damnation and capital sin, anyway, it doesn’t matter. I was getting ahead of myself a bit quickly. I’ll back up. Let us assume that Adam is damned, and yet that astounds me, it really astounds me: is he damned? Judas certainly is, he’s damned. I am going to tell you why he [Adam] isn’t damned, it’s a mistake. It’s some excessive theologians, who said that Adam was damned, [but] he cannot be damned. That depends on how you define damnation. But there you are, Leibniz defines it, in the wake of a certain number of theologians: if Judas is damned, it’s because of the disposition in which he died. Read into this also, no doubt, the disposition that already was the one he had when he betrayed Christ. It’s because of “the disposition in which he died, specifically his hatred of God that was burning him in dying” [The Philosopher’s Confession]. [Pause] The damned man is thus he who, I translate: “The damned is he whose souls is filled, completed, whose amplitude of souls is completed by hatred of God. This hate is in the present.”
You’ll tell me, ok, but still, in what sense? First, I am clarifying a bit, because all this is very important. Am I not in the process – so here, we advance considerably within the problem that remains for us — because am I not in the process of discovering that there is an absolute minimum of amplitude of the soul? What is the smallest conceivable amplitude of the soul? It’s the soul of the damned man. That will have immense consequences. The minimum of amplitude is the soul of the damned. Why does the soul of the damned present the minimum of amplitude? This soul is filled with hatred of God in the present, the hatred of God in the present, nothing else to say except that, and I am feeling myself shiver a bit: the hatred of God in the present. We shall see what that brings about. And I say it’s the smallest amplitude of the soul. Why? Because God, by definition, is the supreme being, the infinite being. The soul penetrated by hatred of God vomits everything, literally, vomits everything, everything except this hate: me, I hate God. And the sole predicate of the damned soul [is]: I hate God. It’s its only predicate. How is that possible? A damned soul is a monad, yes, it’s a monad. Every monad expresses the world, yes, every monad expresses the world. Only you recall perhaps, I always return to this Leibnizian rule without which everything collapses: every monad expresses the world, yes, the infinite world, but the monad only expresses clearly a little region of the world, its own neighborhood, or as Leibniz says – I don’t think I have ever cited this text – so I quote: his subdivision (département). Each monad is the expression of the whole world, but each one has a little subdivision that distinguishes it from the others, specifically the region of world, the neighborhood of world that the monad expresses clearly. You understand?
So the damned soul? Ok, it’s a monad. It continues to express the whole world, but its subdivision is reduced nearly to zero. It’s a soul with a predicate, if I call “predicate” the attributes or events of the region, of the subdivision, of the region proper to the monad. Its own region, its clear region, it has no other clarity than this horrible clarity of: I hate God! I can say that it’s the minimum amplitude. But why is this hate perpetually present? Well it’s precisely because it fills the amplitude of the soul, these so narrow-minded (étroites) souls, such narrow-minded souls, abominable souls, so narrow-minded, narrow-minded, they encompass only this: I hate God, God I hate you! That’s what Judas is. But why is this hate always renewed in the present? Well, it’s because, insofar as it translates the amplitude of the soul, it doesn’t stop recreating itself at every instant. Minimum of amplitude, that is. It’s a case of constancy, it’s a constant amplitude, invariable, there is none that is smaller. And insofar as it fills the amplitude of the soul, it gives lots of joy to the damned. One has to imagine the damned as happy, except for something that is going to change (tourner) in their confusion. It’s an episodic story, the pleasure of the damned.
The damned person is a kind of infamy, he is polluted (infect), because he complains. You will immediately recognize who rediscovered this tradition. He complains, he never stops complaining: my suffering, oh my, the fire, no, I didn’t deserve that [Laughter]… and quietly he laughs![14] He feels pleasures that you cannot conceive. Why? Certainly, the fire exists, among small inconveniences [Laughter], all that is word for word in the Philosopher’s Confession. But, you understand, the act that adequately fills the amplitude of the soul, this hate for God, it defines a fantastic pleasure, it’s the joy of the free act: I hate God. The damned knows quite well that his complaints are false complaints. [Pause] Leibniz’s formula is splendid, so learn it by heart, because it shows, moreover, [that] I am correct about the importance of the present. Leibniz says: “The damned person is not eternally damned,” not eternally damned, “but he is forever damnable, and damns himself at every moment.” “The damned person is not eternally damned, but he is forever damnable, and damns himself at every moment.” That you must learn by heart, [Laughter] so at least you will have a quote from Leibniz that isn’t “the best of possible worlds,” in which case you won’t have wasted the whole year. And furthermore, this quote is much more disturbing than “the best of possible worlds”, since how are the damned going to belong to the best of possible worlds? That will truly be a joy to discover it. But in any case, you see, he perpetually redamns himself in the present. Necessarily.
But to cease being damned, what must he do?[15] So there we have the source of my question, Kirsten. You see? My question, what’s bothering me greatly, is that I know of no sacred or secular book that says that Adam did anything whatsoever out of hatred for God.
Kirsten: [Inaudible reply]
Deleuze: He’s what?… Ah, so you think that it’s baptism that creates the border there. [Diverse reactions and voices] Ah, that’s possible… No, but she may be quite correct, theologically… [Diverse voices] He [God] has given this possibility to whom?
A student: To all that came after him…
Deleuze: Ah, fine, to everyone, Adam included.
The student: Except the wicked.
Deleuze: Except the wicked… In the theological, catholic deity, it’s not damned… Yes?
A student: [Inaudible question from the back]
Deleuze: What? I can’t hear you. — [Diverse voices] I’m sensing that no problem has ever [created as much reaction] … [Laughter] It’s really odd…. Ah, you have to be quiet, I can’t hear what he’s saying…
A student: [A barely audible question about damnation]
Deleuze: Ah, you want me to… Ah, well, there, listen, it’s not to me that you should ask that. [Laughter] Oh, I would be sufficiently damned for everybody, you know? [Laughter] Ah, that goes well or it doesn’t, eh? Nothing’s going well anymore, especially this…
A woman student: [Question about Judas’s suicide]
Deleuze: Why did he kill himself? Why did Judas kill himself?
A student [close to Deleuze]: He despaired of receiving God’s forgiveness.
Deleuze: Eh, well no, he kills himself too but entirely out of hatred for God. His final thought – here, the text is formal – one must say, the term is a bit technical, out of rejection of God (retournement contre Dieu). His hatred of God turns itself against him, in the Leibnizian version, but this is fundamental, that the damned die on hating God as the final thought to the extent that someone who doesn’t die within this final thought, on hating God, will not be damned whatever he may have done.
A student: [Barely audible comment, about Adam]
Deleuze: Fine, it’s what we ourselves are saying, you understand? But then, what still bothers me a bit is that in this…
The student: [He interrupts and continues his comment]
Deleuze: Ah, yes, yes, yes, but all that you are saying isn’t false, but our problem is theological, and notably… on catholic theology or then protestant or reformed theology, what did it say? So there, I have a specialist who tells me that Adam clearly was damned.
Kirsten: No, I didn’t say that…
Deleuze: But then there’s another specialist who says no… You know, theology is not at all like philosophy. In philosophy, everybody is in agreement, [Laughter] but in theology, that’s not how it is… [Pause, diverse voices]
A student: [Inaudible comment]
Deleuze: Ah, there are other problems there. [Laughter] Listen, allow me to have a nice private laugh because [Laughter] sometimes I get worn out…
A student: [Inaudible comment]
Deleuze: Ah, no, everyone is damned? You’re going to see that this is not possible.
A student: [Inaudible comment]
Deleuze: Oh, among the Orthodox? Among the Russian Orthodox, everyone is damned? What are you talking about there?
A student: Among the Russian people.
Deleuze: Oh, we’d have to go talk to the Russian people if…
The student: [Comment on the dead in Russia]
Deleuze: Oh, listen, listen, let’s not get the Russian people mixed up in this because…
A student [Comment from the back]
Deleuze: What?
A student: [Question about hatred against God]
Deleuze: Well there, in my view… [Diverse voices] No, damnation is infinite… Is death infinite? No, you’ll see, Leibniz has thought of everything. [Laughter]
But finally here, I am torn between a rising mad howl of laughter (fou rire) and a radical indignation. Because I have to say that we have never had such an animated session [Laughter] except concerning such childishness (puérilités), whereas you were presented with some really splendid sessions on mathematics, and then suddenly, I mention Beelzebub, Judas, and you go aaaaahhhh, [Laughter] and everyone has something to say! This is really something, eh? … Shame on you! Shame! Shame on you! Besides, besides, perhaps you have some reasons for loving damnation so much.
So listen to me: obviously, it’s joy. Of course, he suffers, he suffers abominably. But it’s joy. It’s joy to the extent that he has an amplitude of soul such that this amplitude is completely filled by the affect of hating God. And thus he is always damnable, but that means that at each instant, he could be undamned. Thus Leibniz does not at all consider as unlikely, or as impossible, that a damned person might escape from damnation. What would be required? It would suffice that his soul, uniquely – it’s quite simple – it would suffice that he cease vomiting up the world. We saw what vomiting up the world meant. Vomiting up the world is to include in one’s subdivision, in one’s clear region only a single predicate: the hatred of God! [Pause] So it would suffice [Pause] for his amplitude of soul to increase a little, just tiny bit, and suddenly he would be undamned. But why, why is there very little chance of this, and even at the limit, that he will never do it? Because he desires this extant state of amplitude too much, this state that, in fact, is adequately filled by the single predicate: God, I hate you! Such that he never ceases being redamned. Forever damnable, he never ceases renewing his hate for God because that’s what gives him the greatest pleasure in relation to his amplitude of soul.
Why would he change the amplitude? From all this, Beelzebub’s loathsome song resonates. As I see that you are in a great mood, [Laughter] I have to sing for your pleasure the song of Beelzebub, that has been translated quite well by Belaval, but in Latin, it’s all the more beautiful a song. I can sing it to you in Latin or in French. Here’s the song of Beelzebub.[16] — [Aside to Richard Pinhas: That’s what you have to put in [the composition]… [Laughter] [Deleuze reads in the most dramatic of voices]:  “Poison” – it’s quite beautiful – “enters the limbs and already rages the anger through the whole body: crime is heaped upon crime” – since I am sure that you will like this – “Crime is heaped upon crime. Thus we are purified. The only victim for the frenzied is the sacrifice of the enemy. It is pleasing that his flesh be scattered in the winds and mangled alive, drawn into a thousand pieces, persecuted with as many marks of my own pain. The trumpet itself summoning those to be resurrected to withdraw the flesh.”
So that’s what Beelzebub says. And he is like Judas, the one whose amplitude of soul. And then Leibniz tells the story, the maddening story of the hermit who obtained from God the grace of Beelzebub himself. And God had told him: yes, go ahead; it [God] just says that the only condition is that he renounce, not anything that he had done, nothing at all, that he renounce the hate he has for me. In other words, he must open his soul a bit. And the hermit says, thank you, my God, it’s done, he is saved! He goes to see Beelzebub who says, “there’s certainly a condition,” as Beelzebub is clever, “surely a condition.” “No, no,” says the hermit, “it’s nothing, just a tiny little thing: renounce the hate that you have for God.” And Beelzebub erupts, he tells the hermit: “Out of my sight, you poor idiot, poor imbecile; you don’t see that this is my pleasure and it’s my reason for living.” Fine.
In other words, who is the damned? You recognized him. Some time later Nietzsche will create his portrait: the damned is the man of ressentiment, the man of vengeance, the vengeance against God. It matters little that it’s against God or something else, what matters is that it’s the hateful man, the vengeful man. Henceforth we understand much better. If you take, for example, the entire theme of the resentful man in Nietzsche, we create a misunderstanding when we think that it’s a man connected to the past. It’s not at all a man connected to the past, the resentful man; it’s the vengeful man. He is connected to the present wound (trace). He never ceases scratching, exactly like the damned man, never ceases scratching this wound, this wound in the present that the past has left in him. In other words, the resentful or vengeful man is man in the present, just as Leibniz tells us: damnation is indeed in the present, it’s the minimum of amplitude.
So, in fact, it is possible at every instant… What does it mean that the damned are free? The damned would be able to emerge from damnation at every instant. Return to the schema:[17] in the end, I have an absolute minimum of amplitude in the soul. Thus it does not go on to infinity. [Deleuze goes to the board] It goes to infinity, there are nonetheless an infinity of degrees. But I can say that the minimum of amplitude is when the subdivision of the soul – here I use a very rigorous Leibnizian vocabulary, that is, the clear region, the clarified region, the reserved quarter, the portion of world expressed clearly – so it’s when the subdivision of the soul is reduced uniquely to the present hate against God, to the present hate toward God, henceforth, I render myself damnable. The damnable is someone who hates God, and I damn myself at each instant precisely to the extent that I do not cease realizing (effectuer) this amplitude. But once again, by a mistaken movement even, were Beelzebub to give a bit of superior amplitude to his soul, he would be immediately undamned. That’s what we learn from the great Philosopher’s Confession.
Is this ok? No difficulties? I don’t know if it’s because of my comment earlier, but you aren’t saying anything, and I find you more suspicious (sournois, sly) than ever. (Laughter)
A student: [Inaudible comment]
Deleuze: It’s one or the other, but sometimes the soul is ample, and it’s both, it’s whole.
So, here’s what I’d like to say now, that still and all, aren’t you struck, for those who are a bit familiar… Whereas I believe myself to have completely respected Leibniz’s texts, aren’t you struck by their hallucinating resemblance to the Bergsonian conception of freedom? Much later, Bergson will devote the third chapter of Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness to freedom. What does he tell us? First, he distinguishes two problems, and we see that Leibniz distinguished two problems as well. And the first problem deals with the act in the present, what is a free act in the present. And I see that everything rests on the following theme: [Pause] those who deny freedom create a grotesque conception of motives, and therefore why [there is] an entirely similar critical to Leibniz’s, but renourished, reformed based on properly Bergsonian themes, specifically the whole Bergsonian theme is this: in a deliberation, when I return to the motive, it’s evident that this motive has changed due to there being duration. He says, “Let’s take a simple case, I hesitate between two opposite feelings: do I love him or do I hate him?[18] The self and the feelings which stir it *are found assimilated by the adversaries of freedom, are found assimilated to* well defined objects, which remain identical during the whole of the process.[19] But if it is always the same self which deliberates, and if the two opposite feelings by which it is moved do not change, how, in virtue of this very principle of causality which determinism appeals to, will the self ever come to a decision? The truth is that the self, by the mere fact of experiencing the first feeling, has already changed to a slight extent when the second supervenes: all the time that the deliberation is going on, the self is changing and is consequently modifying the two feelings which agitate it. A dynamic series of states is thus formed which permeate and strengthen one another, and which will lead by a natural evolution to a free act.” We could hardly say it better, that’s almost signed Leibniz: a dynamic series of states. We saw that this was inclusion, inclusion of a dynamic series of states in the self.[20] You follow me. In fact, the dynamic series is A prime, B prime, A double prime, B double prime, A third, B third, etc. And what will Bergson constantly say? He will say: it’s precisely the free act, it’s exactly the act that expresses the self at a particular moment of duration. Moreover, he will add to this on his own a schema that wards off or reunites both what one must criticize and what one must reestablish. I am showing this schema; it’s the schema of inflection. He brings together both of them, the good and the bad one. And in fact, if he joins them, it’s because he shows that psychic life is an inflection, and the adversaries of freedom forget it all at once and that, at the instance O, they make a kind of bifurcation that no longer corresponds to the movement in the process of being created, and that neglects all the laws of the movement in the process of being created. Such that Bergson’s great idea is: what is an act that expresses the self? It’s quite simple: he defines it all the time – and it’s so Bergsonian this definition – an act that expresses the self is an act that receives from the soul that makes it the unity of the movement in the process of being created, the unity of a movement in the process of being created, unity of a movement in the process of being created that one must especially not confuse with the wound (trace) of a movement already made. You will find both themes of… [Deleuze does not finish the sentence] A little break?[21]
Part 4
I was pointing out to you this first schema on inflection in Bergson, and then I said: if you read the whole of chapter three in the Essay on Immediate Data [of Consciousness], you will see that Bergson… Does anyone have a little piece of candy…? Yeah? Some lozenges? Yeah? [Laughter]. Ah! [Pause] One has to live dangerously. [Pause] That’s what health is. [Pause with lozenges] So it’s even worse. [Laughter] Bergson tells us [Deleuze slightly choking; laughter]: there is another problem.[22] He distinguishes it clearly: the adversaries of freedom, in general, the determinists, they can do nothing when they are shown what an act in the present is. As clever as they are, they always gather themselves together around the past. And it’s another problem, they say, and the problem is this: in assuming that someone knows all the antecedents of an act, that is, everything that happened before, will he be able to predict the act? You see that it’s another problem since the element is no longer the act in the present, but the past antecedents. Do past antecedents suffice to determine the act? And as you will see, Bergson says with insistence that it’s another problem, but that we have to reexamine everything on the level of the other problem.
And in Leibniz, it’s exactly the same thing. You have an emergence of this other problem which reconnects us to what? It reconnects us obviously to God. For what is this intelligence capable of knowing all the antecedents of the act? The intelligence capable of knowing all the antecedents in a monad is God. Bergson says, “A superior intelligence”. Assuming that a superior intelligence, that is God, might know all past antecedents, is it capable of predicting the movement or the act before it occurs? You understand? That’s the new problem. For example, in the Monadology, where God is said [to be] “reading all past antecedents, reading in the monad,” you remember? We gave a lot of importance to this word, “to read”.  God reads in the monad all the past antecedents. Can he predict the act of the monad, that is, I travel, I write, I go to the tavern, assuming he would know all the antecedents?
Here’s what Bergson says: what does it mean to know everything, to know all antecedents? One thing or the other: either it means knowing all the antecedents and the act that results from them, or it means knowing only the antecedents. And in light of this, we wonder if, knowing only all the antecedents, God is capable of predicting. This second hypothesis returns us to the problem. Ok fine, that remains a problem. God is supposed to know all the antecedents of an act that a monad undertakes, and is he capable of predicting this act? We’re making no progress. This is insofar as it is everywhere and forever that God knows at once the antecedents and the act that is going to result from them. But what does it mean to be everywhere and forever? Understand?
Being everywhere and forever is very simple; it means it [God] itself passes through every state through which each monad passes. And in fact, Leibniz seems to say so, in a text from the Discourse on Metaphysics, where he says: “All monads, each monad is the product or the result of a viewing (une vue) of God.” I would say there is a passage of God in each monad. God passes through all the monads. I use this expression not simply because “to pass” is Bergsonian, but there is a text by Whitehead – and so, we are approaching the confrontation that I desire between these two great philosophers, Whitehead and Leibniz – where Whitehead tells us: what happens in a room over an hour, for example, what happens in this room over an hour is a passage of nature in this room. And he reveals this very beautiful concept; we shall see it, of passage of Nature. It’s nature that passes; it passes through this room, and in this room, in the same way, I think, and in a very close sense, one has to say that God passes in each monad and through each monad. I would say almost that each monad includes this passage of God, God passing through all the states of the monad.
Simply put, God is eternal, and that means what? That means that, in its eternity, it passes all at once through all the states of all the monads. So, saying that it passes through all the states of all the monads, that comes down to saying what? That it coincides with this monad. When it knows all the past antecedents of the monad, it coincides with the present of the monad. In other words, it creates the act of the monad at the same time that the monad creates it [the act]. You will tell me: not at all, it gets out ahead (il devance). But no, Leibniz is the first to have insisted on this in all sorts of texts: it goes without saying that eternity doesn’t consist either of getting ahead or getting behind. Moreover, getting ahead has strictly no meaning. And about this, it seems to me that Leibniz is almost going farther than Bergson in this regard. Getting out head strictly has no meaning.
Assume the world and define it by a succession of states, a, b, c, d, succession of states. And say: I can conceive that the world began ten years earlier, or thousands of years earlier. If you change nothing in the states, if it is a question of the same states, the proposition is strictly devoid of meaning. Reflect an instant; that ought to appear obvious to you. For if time must be defined as the order of states, or as the form of succession of states, you can say: what happens if the world began thousands of years before, provided that you change, that you assume that these are not the same states? If these are the same states, you have no means of distinguishing the effective chronology and the chronology that would exist if the world began ten years or one hundred years earlier. In other words, although you could make it begin earlier, it doesn’t begin earlier; everything is strictly identical. Which comes down to saying: “the world could have begun earlier,” to the extent that you keep and define the world by the same succession of states, is a proposition devoid of meaning since you will have no means to distinguish the two chronologies. That’s obvious. In other words, this comes down to saying that eternity has never consisted in getting out ahead (devancer). What one must say is that God, in its eternity, passes through all the states of all the monads, whereas the monads, following the order of time, pass successively through the states [that are] themselves successive. But that does not prevent God, in its eternity, from only happening to coincide with each monad at the moment that [that monad] creates the act in the present.
So, I return to Bergson who said precisely the same thing. He says: you distinguish Peter who creates the act, and Paul, the superior intelligence who knows all antecedents and who is supposed to predict the act. Ok, Paul is supposed to know all the antecedents. At the moment that Peter commits the act, you will realize that Paul necessarily coincides with Peter. That is, he doesn’t at all predict the act, he coincides with Peter, and he commits the act at the same time as Peter. It’s afterwards that you tell yourself: so he could predict. But, in fact, Peter and Paul will have only created a one and same person at the moment of the present act. And Bergson will then inspire us, I refer you to the readings, [with] another schema of inflection. What obviously interests me is that there are two schemas of inflection; generally speaking, you will look in the text, to show that Peter and Paul, that is, the monad and God, coincide necessarily at the level of the act of predicting.
So, from all perspectives, what I draw from this is this conception of very, very rigorous freedom in Leibniz and that can be understood only by the theme, if you will, by the Bergsonian theme, but which once again seems to me absolutely and entirely present in Leibniz, specifically the unity of a movement in the process of being created, the present act in the process of being created, specifically the present act to which one is always brought back. And that does not prevent what, I maintain, presents itself quite seriously, and it’s on this topic that I want to finish. It’s this: if it is true that freedom is saved, one does not see very well how morality is going to be saved.[23] And yet Leibniz is above all a moral philosopher, and moreover, he is without doubt the first among philosophers – and in this way, he already belongs to the eighteenth century – to have conceived of morality as progress, no longer as conformity with nature, but as progress of reason. It’s through this that he is fully of the eighteenth century and pre-Kantian; he is already one aspect that Kant will realize. Morality is not at all on the side of nature as the morality of the ancient wise man; it is the progressivity of reason, the progression of reason.
But my whole problem is: with such a conception of freedom, what does that mean? How can one define a tendency toward the best? I can always say: a tendency toward gaining amplitude, but from where does it come, and why? In fact, the progress of reason would exist if I could show that there would be a tendency of the soul to increase its amplitude, so then I could define progress. And understand again that [Leibniz] finds himself before a really strange problem that was noticed by all of Leibniz’s commentators: that God, having chosen the best of possible worlds, there is a determined quantity of progress. The best of possible worlds is the outcome (suite), as Leibniz says in a letter, the outcome of the most perfect possible, although no state of this outcome would itself be perfect. The most perfect outcome possible. But the most perfect outcome possible, that defines a maximum, defines a quantity of progress. Henceforth, how could a soul, for example mine, make progress, except resulting from a horrible condition: that other souls regress? [Laughter] And it is common, for example among certain of Leibniz’s commentators, to remark that according to them, Leibniz finds himself again before a kind of impasse since the progress possible for a soul is always compensated by the regression of other souls, by virtue of the necessity of a determined quantity of progress chosen for the world by God.
So, with the last point, we grasp at least a definition of progress. I progress if my soul increases its amplitude, but it’s not enough to say that because how can my soul increase since it expresses the entire world? Ok! So we always come back, I come back eternally to this point that seems to me equally essential: my soul expresses the entire world, but it expresses clearly only a small part of the world, and it’s my subdivision. My subdivision is limited, my region, my quarter, whatever you like. Henceforth what does it mean to progress? To increase the amplitude of my soul, that can no more be expressed than the world, I can’t do it. On the other hand, I can increase my subdivision, I can increase my quarter which, itself, is limited. So I have a more precise idea of what it means to progress. “To progress” is increasing the amplitude of my soul, that is, increasing the subdivision or clarified region that comes back to us, comes back to each of us, and which is distinguished from whatever comes back to the other (à l’autre). Fine.
But what does it mean to “increase my clarified region”? Must we understand it in extension? Yes and no. Here we must be concrete. I say yes and no because the idea that a monad, you or me, might dispose of a subdivision, that is, a clarified region that we express more perfectly than the rest, it’s correct, this idea, but this clarified region is a statistic. I mean that it’s the same that we have as child, adult, and old man, but it’s not the same that we have in good and ill health, not the same when feeling tired and feeling fit. For example, I arrived [today] with a vast clarified region, and now my clarified region is tending to become miniscule. So there are constant variations of the clarified region. Thus, increasing the clarified region, we see that this can mean carrying it to its possible maximum, in each case. And then, this is not a gain in extension, we must add, it’s a gain in deepening. It’s less a question of extending the clarified region than of deepening it, that is, I would say of developing its power of action (puissance), which comes down to saying in philosophical terms of the seventeenth century, bringing it to distinction. It was only clear, it wasn’t distinct. One must bring it to distinction, and that can only occur through knowledge (la connaissance).
So all that offers a sense to increasing the amplitude of my soul, that is, progressing. And here you are, I even have criteria, [so] now I can return. I am giving a sense to the tendency toward the best. There is indeed a tendency toward the best. What causes me to say that it would be better to work than to go out to the tavern? It’s because going to the tavern is an act that corresponds to an amplitude of soul quite inferior to working. Oh yes, that’s how it is! You see the extent to which I am served by having an absolute minimum of amplitude of soul. The damned man, once more, is a poor soul who has reduced his subdivision to a single predicate: I hate God, hating God. So all this provides an idea of progress. I can progress. The tendency toward the best… You see that there is even a veritable philosophical revolution because the idea of the goodness (bien) — which up to that point was the guarantee of the conformity with nature, was the guarantee of morality conceived as conformity with nature — is replaced by Leibniz with the best. And the best is not the guarantee of morality as conformity with nature, but the guarantee of the new morality as progression of the soul. That’s quite essential.
So ok, each of us can progress on his or her own, but by progressing, at first glance, we always return to this point, at first glance, it’s as if [progressing] gave a swift kick to others. Since I accomplish a certain quantity of progress and the quantity is fixed for the best of possible worlds, it is really necessary that if I myself make progress, this has to be compensated. At first glance, it seems to me that an other soul has to regress. You realize, this is a kind of struggle for moral existence. Yeah. How to get out of this? I think that Leibniz gets out of it, only it’s extremely beautiful, so very difficult. For, here we are, contrary to the eternity of God, who passes through all the monads, eternally, thus outside time, the monads aren’t developed outside time. Monads are subject to the order of time. The monads are subject to the order of time. In what sense are they subject to the order of time? Here’s my civil birth. We have to come back to things we have begun to see. I am starting, I am outlining them, but we had best look only at them at a future meeting; it’s a very theatrical production, all quite properly Baroque, that we will have to look at closely. I am examining cases. My birth certificate is what? It’s the date on which I am born as a supposedly reasonable creature. [Pause] But my soul, it isn’t born. My soul, you remember, it isn’t born; it was there the whole time, from the start of the world, and my body as well. My body was infinitely folded in upon itself, infinitely tiny; it’s infinitely folded within Adam’s seed, and my soul, inseparable from my body, existed only as a sensitive or animal soul, there’s what Leibniz tells us.
But then, what distinguished me, called [me] to become at any given moment a reasonable creature, what distinguished me from animals, they who also existed from the beginning of the world, folded in upon the seed of the great ancestor, with sensitive and animal souls? The most precise of Leibniz’s texts is in a little, beautiful treatise, The Cause of God defended by the conciliation of his justice with his other perfections. You see that the abridged title, The Cause of God, does not mean that which causes God to be, but means “cause” in the juridical sense, defending God’s cause. The Cause of God, defended by the consideration of his justice, etc. … So in the text, The Cause of God, paragraph 82, Leibniz tells us: it is evident through this that we do not affirm the pre-existence of reason. That’s essential! He does not say that the reason of a reasonable being is there from the start, that it coexists in Adam’s seed. This would not be reasonable. He doesn’t say that at all. He says: if I exist from the start of the world, it’s in the form of a body infinitely folded in on itself in the seed of Adam, with a sensitive and animal soul. So we do not affirm the pre-existence of reason, “however one can believe that, in the pre-existing seeds, there was pre-established and prepared by God all that must one day emerge from them. Not simply the human organism, but reason itself, under the form” – under what form? – “under the form of a kind of official document (acte scellé)” – an official document – “bearing a later effect.”[24] This text by Leibniz gives me much to ponder (me fait rêver).
You see: I pre-exist myself since the beginning of the world. In fact, I exist in the seed of Adam, but as sensitive or animal soul. But what distinguishes animal or sensitive souls, which are called to become reasonable souls sometime later, from those destined to remain animal and sensitive souls as are all the souls of cats or dogs or other detestable animals? What distinguishes it? The text tells us: the official document, an official document in the monad, in the animal or sensitive monad. An official document that says what? Bearing a later effect, an official document that is simply a raised seal or a mark, with a date, no doubt, and which shows that at the corresponding date, this sensitive or reasonable soul will be raised up.  It’s the elevation. You recall, we started off from here. A certain number of souls, those who are destined to be reasonable, will be raised up to the higher floor at a given moment. So from the start, God placed within these souls destined to be raised up to the higher floor, it placed an official document.
There’s no need to search any longer, that’s going to move us forward. Recall this for the next time because I will really need this official document. For what is this official document? It’s obviously a light. It’s a light. What is reason if not a light? Without it, the monad is completely black, and we’ve seen that it’s draped in black. You sense what I have in mind and where I am heading, we’ll see the next time; Baroque painting or Baroque architecture. The walls of the monad are black. The monads destined to become reasonable, God seals therein a juridical document, an official document bearing a later effect, that is, he places there a light destined later to be lit. This is quite a marvel, it’s really beautiful.
So when my birth date arrives, it’s the hour of my elevation to the higher floor; my soul becomes reasonable, meaning that the light is lit in the dark monad. [Pause] It’s lit in the monad; the monad goes up a floor, that’s all the same. Good. You see, there is a One (un) when I wasn’t born, One before my birth. We just saw it: I was sleeping in Adam’s seed, or in my ancestors’ seed; I was sleeping all folded in on myself, with my tiny little light unlit, but sealed within my dark monad. That was before my birth. I am born. I am raised up a floor, to the higher floor, you recall all our analyses from the start on the two floors as definition of the Baroque. I go up to the higher floor, and at the moment, my body unfolds, my soul becomes reasonable, the light is lit.
But when I die, what happens? We must continue the series to understand. When I die – but listen, this is not good news that I am announcing to you, no more, no more laughing – you in-volve once more. You do not lose your body or your soul. That would be upsetting if you lost your body; how would God find it again? You’d be entirely scattered. Leibniz is quite disturbed by that. He says: the resurrection is quite lovely, but you must not get dispersed. There as well is a beautiful theological problem. When I die, I in-volve, which means? I go back down a floor, down to the lower floor. In other words, the parts of my body fold in again, and my soul ceases being reasonable, it again becomes a sensitive and reasonable soul. But, ha ha, but, but, but… It carries off with it a new official document. There I regret to say that Leibniz does not say it formally, [Laughter] but all evidence points to him saying it implicitly. It’s so obvious that he feels no need to say it. But for us, we do feel the need to say it. But in the end, if he says it, yes, he says it nonetheless. My soul carries away an official document, obviously! And you can ask me what is this new official document? The new official document is a juridical document; all this is in the juridical sense. An official document is a juridical document. The official document of my birth is a birth certificate. I say: the soul necessarily carries off another official document while dying, my reasonable soul, it’s the death certificate. What is the death certificate of a reasonable soul, when it dies? [Interruption from someone entering the room] — What is it you are looking for? … Ah, it’s not here. [Laughter] … Ah, well it’s at two o’clock then. [Pause] … We should have said yes! [Laughter] Ok, but really, he cut off all my…
A student: The death certificate.
Ah, yes, the death certificate. What is my death certificate? Ha ha, listen: it’s my final reasonable thought. My final reasonable thought. That’s why the final thought is so important. The damned man’s final thought is: I hate God ! I hate God. This is why he’s damned, he’s damned by his final thought. So the damned man carries away in his soul, again become sensitive or animal, this death certificate. And he again goes to sleep, like all other souls. My body folds in, my soul again becomes what it was before its birth as being reasonable, that is, it rebecomes sensitive or animal. I still have a body, and I still have a soul. But my body has stopped unfolding, my soul has ceased being reasonable. The light is snuffed out. [Pause]
Final point: the resurrection. The hour of resurrection comes. At that moment, and only at that moment, all reasonable souls, rather all souls that have been reasonable and have again slipped back into the ashes, etc. … they are re-elevated, that is, again pass into the state of above, their bodies unfold again into a subtle body, into a glorious and notorious body, and souls are judged. And the damned are those who wake up as they died, that is, they wake up hating God. The fortunate and the damned, that’s all there is. Each one reawakens according to one’s final amplitude. The light is relit. Of the light of the damned – since same formula, same proposition: I hate God! as proposition of reason – [it] keeps a minimum of light; it occupies the clear region of the corresponding monad. All lights are relit; one must conceive of the resurrection as something quite enjoyable (gai); there are all the little lights that are relit, all the souls again become reasonable, and each one will have his due according to the order of time, that is, following the life that he led when he was reasonable. You understand?
There you are (Voilà). I will take up this point the next time because it’s not clear. But I will give you an immediate answer. There is little space to say it: if I make progress, myself, it’s to the detriment of others. That would be terrible. The commentators are wrong to say that Leibniz does not get out of this problem since, fortunately, there are the damned. To say: my progress necessarily occurs to the detriment of others that is valid only for the damned, it seems to me. It’s even for that reason that all the others, except the damned, all the others can progress. For what do the damned do? There they are going to be caught in their own trap, fortunately; they are going to stop cackling like birds. What do the damned do? They lower the amplitude of their soul to the maximum; they lower their subdivision to nothing, except “I hate God.” You see this enormous reduction of amplitude.
Henceforth, it’s not at all that they give us a negative example; it’s just that they renounce the amplitude that they could normally have reached as reasonable beings, and they renounce their own amplitude. They renounce it voluntarily by virtue of their devilishness (diablerie). Henceforth, they make possible infinite quantities of progress useful for others, and without doubt, it’s their true punishment. Their true punishment is not the flames of hell; their true punishment is to serve the betterment of others. Not, yet again, not because they would offer a negative example of which everyone would be wary, but because they function somewhat, one might say, as a negative entropy, that is, a discharge in the world of quantities of possible progress. What does “quantities of possible progress” mean? It’s the quantities of clarity that have been renounced, and that return by right to them, insofar as they are reasonable beings. As a result, it seems to me, at this level, progress becomes possible. All souls can progress without draining the quantity of progress. Why? Because there are the damned that voluntarily have withdrawn, withdrawn freely from the general progression and that henceforth have made possible the progression for others, such that the damned play a veritable physical role, like in physics, Maxwell’s demons. There is a kind of physical role of the damned which is precisely that of making progress possible. So you understand, for a demon, for Beelzebub, making progress possible is truly the saddest thing in the world.
I would like you to reflect on that. We will return a bit to this question of progress, and you sense that on this, the time has come for us to consider more closely what the conception of light is in all this.

Lecture 11, 3 March 1987: The Tavern — After the “Dramaturgy of Souls”, Review of the “Upper Floor” 
Part 1
So, you recall, you recall the last time, we saw, we witnessed a kind of dramaturgy of souls. This dramaturgy of souls in Leibniz consists of this: if it’s true that all souls are created from the very start, if we can say that from the very start of the world, at the same time as its creation, they were created in a form that Leibniz, for the moment, calls, sensitive or animal… And when, among all these souls, there are some, let’s say – these are bad choices of words —  there’s a certain number that are called to become reasonable, when their effective existence arrives for them, they are therefore elevated – this is the term, elevation, right, that is important for us for many reasons that you perhaps recall – they are elevated, they rise up. Literally, as you recall, they go up to a higher floor, to the upper floor. And then, with death, they go back down; they again become, they envelop, you recall, they refold their own parts. And then, at the moment of the Last Judgment, they rise up once again. So this is very curious, these souls that rise up, go back down, rise up again. I would say that this offers nothing new at all, and if it is always our history – are these two worlds? Are these two floors of the same world? – it seems to us that there were all sorts of problems there that were going to allow us, that had allowed us already to begin to define the Baroque.
But we had especially seen the status of the damned soul, and the status of the damned is something that creates great enthusiasm in Leibniz, [Laughter] the status of the damned, those who die with the single thought in mind, [the] hatred of God. In this, they again descend like everyone, and then they arise again on the day of Last Judgment, so good, fine. But, we saw how they were useful in the world, and this was their true punishment, and that true punishment wasn’t at all the flames of hell. So, their true punishment was to free up, to renounce if you will, using by themselves the quantities of progress in such a way that the damned objectively freed up quantities of progress usable by other souls.[2] And this is an essential element in the initiation of a theory of progress in Leibniz. So, starting from here, this entire dramaturgy was sketched out. I am assuming there are no problems; that wasn’t very difficult, all that, and then we have all kinds of ideas about this status of the damned. That made for me a… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
What I’d like to present now more generally today is this: to a certain extent, isn’t there – perhaps this isn’t … — the moment to grasp a kind of status of light in this series of elevations and descents? Isn’t there in this a very special regime of light, the happy and the damned? Once again, at the point we’ve reached, there’s a painting by Tintoretto, a Tintoretto painting, the happy and the damned. In a very interesting text, Leibniz tells us, light and shadows, light and shadows are like a kind of binary arithmetic. You recall that binary arithmetic, which we saw, is the kind that only contains two signs, 1 and 0, and that composes all the numbers with 1 and 0, light 1, shadows 0, [Pause] the two being separated – Leibniz invokes Chinese philosophers – the two being separated by the thread of waters, the happy and the damned, it’s Tintoretto’s Final Judgment.[3]
What does that mean, 1 and 0 as light and shadows? Perhaps this isn’t an opposition? You immediately get my question here, one that become more general: can I define a regime of light generally as Baroque, in contrast to other regimes of light? Light and shadows, I am saying, are not an opposition; they are like the 1 and 0. Perhaps the 1 and 0, right, suffice to distinguish the happy and the damned, but in a certain way, we say that there isn’t really an opposition. And why isn’t there opposition? Because the first fundamental point, it seems to me, in this attempt to color in Leibniz’s philosophy, is that the monad is dark (sombre), the depths of the monad is dark. And we saw this, we say this, if we take seriously the whole aspect of “without doors or windows” – the monad is without doors or windows, that is, the closed interiority that includes its own predicates – all that comes down to saying, if you put forth this monad, it’s a closed room. As we’ve seen a thousand times, it’s dark.[4]
Notice that I haven’t said that it consist of shadows. Darkness is not black. It’s dark; we can’t say anything more. Latin knows this term, dark; that is not exactly the same thing as black. In Latin, black is niger, but dark is fuscum. [Deleuze spells it out] If I say this, it’s because Spinoza in his tab… Excuse me, Leibniz in his definition tables uses fuscum subnigram, that is, literally, a blackish darkness, blackish darkness. Why does he introduce it? So this isn’t the same thing. In this definition table, we will see, he defines white, black, fuscum, and colors. He sketches out a theory of colors. Good. I am saying, the depths of the monad are dark. This is the fuscum subnigram, the without doors or windows, the closed room. [Pause] Fine.
Perhaps we can call a “Baroque revolution” in painting the one creating a return to depths or grounds.[5] [Pause] The ground of a painting is not its background. The ground of a painting is this from which all the grounds emerge and which determines the relation between planes. The ground is not background. The ground is that from which all the grounds emerge, the fore ground and back ground, and that [the ground] determines in each case the relation of fore ground to back ground. [Pause] If I say – all this is hypothesis, eh? – if I say, we can define Baroque painting, or we can try to define Baroque painting as the return to ground, what does that mean? It means before, previously… What is previously? We need not look too far; let’s say the Renaissance, or a bit before it. Before, the ground is white, [Pause] and no doubt, it’s essential that the ground be white before because, in being white, the ground acts as foundation of painting as oil painting. You recall, I am not saying that the back ground is white; I am saying that ground is white. The founder of oil painting we generally consider to be [Jan] Van Eyck, fifteenth century. He’s Flemish, and the Italians of the sixteenth century will borrow Van Eyck’s secret. [A brief, high-pitched sound is heard in the room; laughter] An excellent commentator, Xavier de Langlais, judges that, finally, painting stops with Van Eyck, and that’s fine, that’s really fine.[6] This is like people who say, well yes, music stops with the Gregorian chant, philosophy stops with St. Thomas, [Laughter] painting stops with Van Eyck. I mean these are powerful positions, and that means something. It’s obviously… It’s not enough to say that this is reactionary. They mean something, something humorous.
Langlais’s idea is quite simple: it’s that after Van Eyck, painters no longer paint other than as pigs, and for some simple reasons, hence this story of the return to grounds. What was Van Eyck’s ground that establishes oil painting? Well, it consisted in covering the canvas or wood with a layer either of chalk or of amorphous gypsum. [Pause] It’s on this that the painter creates his outline; he washes the outline – this is the second operation – [Pause] with diluted water or with [substance unclear]. Third operation: he adds colors and shadows and light.[7] [Pause] Goethe writes in The Theory of Colors – Goethe describes admirably this operation — paragraph 902 and those that follow, [Deleuze looks in the text] under the title “The Grounds”:  “It was the practice of the earlier artists to paint on light grounds” – “light” is not a good choice, but well, we can… and in fact, he immediately describes this: “This ground consisted of gypsum, and was thickly spread on linen or panel, and then levigated, polished”; that was the first operation. Second operation: “After the outline was drawn, the subject was washed in with a blackish or brownish color.” [Pause] Third operation, so he adds: “Pictures prepared in this manner for coloring are still in existence, by Leonardo da Vinci, and Fra Bartolomeo; there are also several by Guido,” very good, fine. Third operation: “When the artist proceeded to color, and had to represent white draperies, he sometimes suffered the ground to remain untouched. Titian did this late in life when he had attained the greatest certainty in practice and could accomplish much with little labor. The whitish ground was left as a middle tint, the shadows painted in, and the high lights touched on.”[8] You see here Van Eyck’s three operations of painting that are truly going to be the founding acts of oil painting.
What represents… Can we say that this is a revolution when this introduces – I’m not saying universally – but when that introduces the dark depth? It’s a serious turnaround. The depth or ground becomes fuscum; it becomes fuscum subnigram. [Pause] It becomes blackish darkness; this is an act of [inaudible]; [Goethe] states it very well, paragraph 907: “It was the practice for a time to paint on dark grounds. Tintoretto probably introduced them.” It was Tintoretto who introduced them; I believe that since Goethe, we are sure of this, and these grounds underwent a huge development with a very great painter named Caravaggio. Fine. [Pause]
What happens with a very dark ground, with this dark ground? With this dark ground, fine, over this, over this dark ground, what does this constitute? What’s going to change? It’s literally going to be like a ground of colors. There is also [Heinrich] Wölfflin, a very great art critic who speaks of this: at this era, what the painter discovers is the participation of all colors and what Goethe already called the obscure nature of color, the opacity of color, the dark nature of color. You’ll say, no, there are bright colors; that changes nothing. In one of his most beautiful pages, Goethe will define white as “the primary opacity”. The dark nature of color, all color participates in a dark nature, a dark nature. And henceforth, the relations between colors as such – you sense already that the primacy of local color – it’s finished. The primacy of local color necessarily is finished since what’s in the process of being liberated when you paint in colors in their dark nature, that is, in the way that they emerge from a ground of colors, from a fuscum, that will be the relation of contrast and direct complementarity, how starting from the ground of colors a green stroke connects to a red stroke, how a yellow on the left refers to a blue on the right. This is what you are going to see developed freely starting from the fuscum. Colors are no longer apposed on white, to simplify everything, eh? Colors are generated starting from the fuscum. [Pause]
That changes a lot of things. I would say, what is it that it changes? Well, the whole white ground was for… In my view, that changes three things: the entire white ground was to assure the preponderance of the fore ground. [Pause] Now, on the contrary, everything emerges from the back ground. [Pause] Second thing: [Pause] substitution of chiaroscuro for local color. [Pause] Third: substitution of recovering (recouvrement) for contour. [Pause]
At the same time, one could obviously object, ok look, it’s not possible to define the Baroque by this reversal of ground, by this arrival of the fuscum, or by the discovery of the dark ground of color. Why isn’t this possible? Here, we will say, well, we are going to encounter… I’d like us to encounter these problems. We are perpetually told, but in certain cases, yes, but there are always cases that have… A typical example considered as one among the typically Baroque painters [is] Rubens. And it’s obvious that Rubens does not use blackish grounds. Notice why. Xavier de de Langlais doesn’t like that at all; he says all that is the death of painting; it’s the death of painting because there are disadvantages. When one paints on this new kind of ground, it cracks very quickly. It cracks very quickly, and it quickly gets black. This is distressing. Besides that, the Van Eycks have a kind of eternal permanence, whereas the Caravaggios, well, they have to be maintained. They have to be maintained, otherwise they immediately get black, and worse, says de Langlais, they cracked. We know… This is why he says that they don’t know how to paint from that moment onward, and that it’s not going to get better because the Impressionists, what do they use to obtain their colors? That’s really it. It’s the secret of color. They use some famous grounds, bituminous grounds. So then, for de Langlais, the bituminous grounds are a catastrophe. It’s an abomination itself. It’s terrible. [Laughter] How long a painting lasts becomes very problematic. But finally, is this a reason…
So, Rubens, Rubens, we’ll say, ah but no, look closely, you cannot define the Baroque in that way since Rubens, on the contrary, he creates white ground. So then, is there a tradition? Well, no, people… When people say and invoke one case in order to say, look closely, your concept doesn’t work, this is because they create a grotesque idea of what the concept is. They often think that a concept must expand a common characteristic such that when I then speak of a concept of the Baroque, the concept would have to yield the common characteristic of everything that I organize under this concept. And that’s not at all how it works. A concept can very well be a distribution of differential characteristics. [Pause] It can be differential characteristics. It can be a system of differences that link things together. It’s not at all necessarily a system of resemblances.
And, if I take Rubens’s case literally, what does Rubens do? He seems to hold on firmly to tradition with his white ground, but not at all! Not at all! In fact, it’s him… First of all, white ground cakes on enormously, he says, with great thickness, and it’s the white color, no longer chalk or gypsum, such that in this new order, whether it’s the dark ground or a ground in Rubens’s manner, at the extreme, there will no longer be an outline. Here too, this will cause de Langlais to say [that] they no longer know how to paint. There will no longer be an outline. They are working by painting directly, that is, there will be direct alterations (repentirs), and alteration is the opposite of the outline. Alterations, this is an order under which there will be alterations, but then… In Rubens’s case, therefore, you have a white ground that is going to be washed. Washing is already going to give it a tint, and he goes on to paint colors over colors. That is, far from being an exception, in fact he returns to the Baroque under a more general concept. If I say that the Baroque, in any event manages a reversal of ground, either in the form of the promotion of a dark ground of colors, or as the promotion of painting of colors on colors that is, in fact, very different from tradition, from the tradition that Van Eyck insists on, so literally it’s not false when certain critics refer to Rubens as a light Caravaggism (caravagisme clair). You understand? It’s enough that you retain all this, at least if it interests you, but I don’t think it’s very difficult.
What I am retaining for the moment lays in what interests me… Please sense that Leibniz’s philosophical concept is like a painting, let’s say, a Tintoretto or a Caravaggio; it’s not a Rubens. The depths (fond) of the monad is dark.[9] Once again, I am not saying black; I was able to justify this: it’s the reversal of ground. What is this? You sense against whom this is directed. Who is a Renaissance man? Who is it that did not leave behind the Renaissance? Well, it’s Descartes. [Laughter] It’s Descartes. It’s he who paints on chalk, on gypsum. The clear or light idea (l’idée claire) is what? Well, the depth of things is clear; the depth of things is clear. There you have a Cartesian idea from the Renaissance, and that the depths of the monad might be the fuscum, there you have the Baroque reversal. Cartesian clarity is chalk and gypsum. We will see this, moreover, in the theory of light in Descartes. Fine, fine.
Good, you understand, it’s a reversal: the monad is the promotion of the dark depths, and in this dark depths, what happens? Light! But you understand, light, well yes, I indeed have an order of light because it doesn’t occur in the same way as in a cave, as in a room without doors or windows, or then again in fresh air, on a white ground, on a cliff face of chalk. It’s not the same light. Fine, in Leibniz, light only occurs in a cave, the monad. How will the monad reach a cave? It’s not at all the Cartesian Cogito. The Cartesian Cogito is white ground. Good, so then how does light occur? Think of Caravaggio. Think of the great “Calling of Saint Matthew”, if you have the painting in mind, the strange light that comes from a high opening (soupirail). Or else, as we have seen with the dark room, [light] comes from a tiny slit.
So understand that it’s pictorial, but philosophical as well. This is optical, and it’s philosophical.  Who will differentiate between the optical and the philosophical? I mean it’s optical if it’s a question of physical light, and it’s philosophical if it’s a question of mental light, but it’s the same thing. In Leibniz, light presupposes or at least arises on an obscure ground, and even more, not obscure, not only obscure, on a dark ground (fond sombre). [Pause] It comes from a high opening. [Pause] In the Philosopher’s Confession, a text that I used at our last meeting, on page 75 in the French translation: “A light” – this already is important for me, that the text is in Latin, eh? But it’s a certain kind of light, a determinate light; it’s not just light – “A light” – I am reading the translation, but it’s both lovely and precise – “[A light] sliding as if through a slit” – for those who know Latin, per rimas – “sliding as if through a slit in the middle of shadows” (Une lumière glissant comme par une fente à travers les ténèbres).[10] If a supplementary proof were needed that in the story of monads without doors or windows Leibniz has perfectly in his mind the existence of the obscure chamber, camera obscura, you have it there, you will find it in the text of the Philosopher’s Confession.
So, light, so we could say, in the monad, the dark monad, light comes through a thin slit, a thin angled opening, as we have seen, like in the Chapel of La Tourette by Le Courbusier.[11] [Pause] If you recall how the obscure chamber functions, for light to penetrate through the slit and reach the dark room, what is necessary? What’s need is a mirror made like that [Deleuze may demonstrate this with his hands]; two mirrors even are necessary, an interplay of mirrors, the tilting of mirrors, etc.[12] Well, and yes, there’s a mirror, and what is the white? Leibniz tells us that the white is an infinity of – here is how he defines it; it’s a beautiful definition – an infinity of tiny reflecting mirrors, an infinity of tiny reflecting mirrors, reflecting the light, that’s what the white is. [Pause] Good, so I’d say, light creates an eruption within the dark room [Pause] by imposing, by establishing a white zone. That doesn’t surprise you and shouldn’t surprise you at all, at all, at all, at all since you recall, I am reminding you, that the monad contains, in fact, a clear and enlightened region, a privileged region. [Here Deleuze declaims] Each monad expresses the totality of the world, yes! But it expresses it in a privileged manner, a subdivision (département), a quarter, it’s the white zone, [Pause] and as one comes close to the edges of the white zone, [Pause] the more one degrades, that is, the operation of degrading, this is the shadow insofar as it rejoins the dark depths. Let’s not confuse the shadow and the dark depth itself. You have therefore: light [that] enters into the monad, [Pause] the white patch made by the light, the degrading from the white patch, to wit, how the light slips toward the dark depths.
In other words, the light that enters into the monad creates the white, and it doesn’t create the white without creating shadow as well. [Pause] And why? Because the white is obscured and is degraded toward the fuscum, toward the dark depths. And inversely, things and predicates of the monad, things that the monad represents, represents to itself, emerge from the dark depths through shadings (ombrage) and tints. [Pause] It’s the domain of chiaroscuro. What is chiaroscuro? We could define it; so one can always give definitions thanks to the preceding analysis. And no, I no longer even have to justify myself. I’d say that chiaroscuro is the interiority of light; it’s the interiority of light in a canvas when it’s a question of painting; it’s the interiority of light in the monad. [Pause]
And this is not surprising; it’s not surprising from Leibniz since, you recall, we saw this quickly, we saw it quickly, the way in which Leibniz tells us, and told us, that projections, geometric projections necessarily had a reverse side, and this reverse side was the theory of shadows. You recall when we discussed this story of cones and points of view.[13] At the apex of the cone, there was the eye. An object was given that we named the geometral. [Pause] And finally there were cuts or projections of the object: the ellipse, the hyperbola, etc. You remember? I won’t go back over that.[14] And Leibniz linked this projective geometry to his great author who was a mathematician of the period, specifically [Gérard] Desargues. And Leibniz reminds us that Desargues himself divided the projective from what he called the theory of shadows.
And on this, what is missing in the projection, in the projective? What’s missing in the projective is the possibility of creating the difference between the periphery of a circle – for example, a flat surface – and the periphery of a half-sphere. From the point of view of the projection, this is exactly the same. What allows you to distinguish the periphery of a circle and the periphery of a half-sphere? It’s the shadows. The projective cannot give it to you. How will you have the shadows? Desargues showed this quite well, and Leibniz takes up this topic in citing Desargues. It suffices, says Leibniz in a beautiful text, it suffices to place the luminous, the luminous, the luminous source, it suffices to place the luminous in the place of the eye. Notice, the projective had three instances: the eye, the object, and the projections. You place the luminous in the locus of the eye, the opaque in the place of the object, and you will have areas of shadow in the place of the projections. Good, so this is… This conception of light conforms completely both to Desargues’s theory of shadows and to the new painting. – [Laughter, interruption] Ah, that’s fine because that’s exactly what it is. [Reference unclear] —
So I say, so what is chiaroscuro? And yes, it’s the interiority of light in the monad because — of course, it’s a way of speaking — because you recall that there wasn’t even a tiny slit, eh? It’s by metaphor that we say that light reaches into the dark monad through a tiny slit. There is no tiny slit. So how does it get in? But we know how it gets in. It’s thanks to, we saw this the last time…You remember how it gets in? This is why I once again need the dramaturgy of souls. How [does it] get in, light into the monad, since there isn’t even a tiny slit, there isn’t even a tiny rima? But, but, but, but God started off by making, by making it [the soul] sensitive or animal, with all of its parts folded. It is born in ashes. When the hour comes, he elevates it; when the hour comes, he elevates it, that is, it unfolds its parts, it stops being animal and sensitive and it becomes reasonable.
Fine, but that doesn’t happen to every soul. There are earthworms that remain earthworms. All souls are not called to become reasonable, so it happens that from the start of creation, God marked among the sensitive or animal souls those that were to be called to become reasonable. They are not already reasonable, but they contain – you recall [Leibniz’s] beautiful text, The Cause of God,  that I read to you at the last meeting; perhaps, I hope you recall – the official document (l’acte scellé).[15] God places into [the soul] an official document, and I told you about the official document in which we obviously see a term of law, it’s a juridical act, well, a juridical act. What is this? It’s an act that responds, that he gives to these monads that must become reasonable, to these souls that must become reasonable, that gives to it the promise, or gives to it a power of light, a power of light since animal souls – there are some, animal souls, we’ll see this later – but that remain animal, in which there is no light that comes forth. When they become… They remain in the dark depths; they are condemned to the fuscum; they are condemned to the dark regime; it’s the dark life.
And the reasonable souls, when they become reasonable, then yes, the light shines forth such that what is the great discovery of… What is the new regime of light? Light grows and dims; it dims toward the dark depths; it grows toward the central region of the monad, that is, the colors since colors are degrees of chiaroscuro. And in fact, Leibniz’s theory of colors consists in taking account of colors through the concavity and the convexity of radius of the curvature, the refracted luminous radius; no matter… Fine, you understand?
What is this progressivity of light? It regresses, it progresses, it grows and dims. But all that is absolutely anti-Cartesian. You cannot suspect the extent to which it’s anti-Cartesian. Wölffliin again, to come back to him, Wölfflin, an art historian from the end of the nineteenth century, said quite well – but that’s how he defines the Baroque regime of light – he says, clarity becomes relative, the relativity of clarity… [Interruption in the recording] [46:24]
Part 2
… And what is relative clarity? In fact, it’s [Pause] a clarity that depends on light. In what sense? In this sense that light doesn’t determine clarity without also determining the degradation of this clarity in the interiority either of the painting or of the monad. So, chiaroscuro is relative clarity in contrast to absolute clarity. And if you take Descartes’s theory of light, what do you see? First characteristic of Descartes’s theory of light is the omnipresence of light, in all directions or, which in fact comes down to the same thing, the instantaneity of light. Baroque light, on the other hand, is directional, from the luminous to the fuscum, and it’s progressive or regressive. It is certainly not instantaneous. Second characteristic in Descartes’s theory is an idea that is completely clear, absolute clarity, all the elements of which are clear. The idea of distinction is absolute clarity, thus, the regime of absolute clarity. Third characteristic: shadow is limitation. Fourth characteristic: primacy of contour, thus of local color, firm contour, play of surfaces, pure colors and without mixtures, local color. Each point is opposed to Leibniz’s conception.
I would like to finish up with all this because you will tell me if for you this seems sufficient to… Look, I mean, here it seems to me that we can talk, in fact, about a new regime or a Baroque regime of light, with this idea of a progressivity or a regressivity of light, of a light that grows or dims, of directions of light that go from the luminous point to the fuscum, and on the entire scale of gradation that is going to engender colors. But in all this, I stopped myself. I did not speak about black, the deep shadows (ténèbres). For what I showed is that, in fact, the somber, and with greater reason shadow, was not a simple privation. Notice that in Leibniz, shadow is neither a privation, nor an opposition with light. Shadow is truly the relation of the luminous to the fuscum or dark depths, and the dark depths are not privation at all. [Pause]
This doesn’t keep the fuscum from not being black, and not the deep shadows. And you indeed sense why Leibniz needs the deep shadows, because without them, we would have difficulty seeing where the dark depths would come from. The dark depths have to come from somewhere. So, you will tell me, on the level of the deep shadows, he has to say that the deep shadows are either privation or else in opposition to light. Perhaps not, since what is this? What do we have in the deep shadows or the black? You recall the definition of the white. White is an infinity of tiny reflecting mirrors. And there’s a definition of black that is so beautiful in Leibniz. He says, but black is not the opposite of white, fine, but what is the opposite of an infinity of tiny reflecting mirrors? It’s an infinity of tiny caverns, and caverns of caverns, that no longer reflect any light, holes within holes. In other words, the black is infinitely spongy matter.[16] Here as well, this is completely anti-Cartesian since, as you recall, we saw this, in Descartes matter is hard. Infinitely spongy matter in which each cavern is a cavern within a cavern within a cavern, well that’s black, an infinity of tiny holes. [Pause]
So then, what will occur? I would say that light passes between. There’s how we could conceive of things to work things out. There is, in fact, no need to work things out; it works out by itself. In the end, starting from the black, everything is a filter.[17] This idea of filter, I believe that in his book on Leibniz, it’s Michel Serres who developed this very, very well. Those who know this book can refer to it; there’s a whole chapter on filters that to me seems to be a very lovely chapter. So, let’s use this idea because Serres says, yes, it’s a tale of filter, and he opposes Leibniz’s method to Descartes’s by showing that Leibniz conceives his entire Combinatory as a succession of filters through which things pass or ought to pass.
Let’s use this idea, and in fact, on the level of perception, Leibniz tells us the sense in which sensitive perception is a filter. He says that you perceive some green. What does that mean, to perceive some green? It’s as if your sensory organs, as if your eye had filtered some bits of dust – retain this expression, bits of dust (poussière) as it’s in the Meditations on Knowledge, Truth and Ideas (Méditations sur les idées) – as if your eye had filtered yellow and blue bits of dust. Fine. Listen well: you know that green is composed of yellow and blue, but you don’t see it. You see green as something original, irreducible, a color that is neither yellow nor blue. And indeed, it’s as if your eye was a filter that eliminated anything that isn’t the yellow and blue bits of dust, and that’s it. And your filter doesn’t see beyond that, which makes you say yellow and blue are primitive colors. It would suffice to have a fine blue filter, and we’d see that yellow on one side is composed of bits of dust of X and Y, and that blue is composed of bits of dust of Z and Z prime, to infinity. In other words, I can conceive of a succession of increasingly fine filters. Yes.
And what would the farthest be, the filter to infinity? The filter to infinity? We know this already. We must be overjoyed! We know this! The finest filter – I’d say that there isn’t one, but if there were one, it would be to infinity – what is the finest filter to infinity? Well, it’s the one that filters the black, that is, the infinity of non-reflecting tiny caverns, and to extract what? Well, to extract the dark, the fuscum. [Pause] It picks out (trie) the black – this is marvelous – it picks out the black in order to extract the fuscum subnigram from it, the blackish depth as ground of colors. And starting from this filter, then other filters will extract colors, etc., etc.
I can say that the action of light passes between the black and the fuscum to end up with this regime of light. I can add that the action of light is the fold. The fold passes between the black and the fuscum, [Long pause] such that you see that, literally, I can say regarding this new status of light, I mean, in fact, to understand the aggregate, we indeed have to start from the idea [that] the depths of the monad are dark, and there was a light, a light even shining forth. And to understand in what sense the depth of light is dark, we have to grasp that… excuse me, that [the depths of] the monad are dark, we have to grasp that the depths of the monad precisely imply this filter that extracts the dark as ground of colors starting from the black, so that this will bring back to you, this system of light will bring back to you all sorts of components of the Baroque.
I’d like to know if there are any comments, if there are any developments, any … yes?
A student: I’d like to say something?
Deleuze: Yes?
The student: I cannot stop thinking of Beckett while listening to you speak, when he says that grey is clear black.
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes.
The student: … and concerning your monad, the closed room, at this moment at the National Library there’s an extraordinary exhibit on Rembrandt…
Deleuze: Yes!
The student: … that completely illustrates what you are saying, and notably an extraordinary, very small etching called the portrait of a philosopher – they don’t say which one, whether it’s you or Leibniz, but anyway… [Laughter] – It’s entirely what your just said, that is, it’s in a closed, dark room, his head in his hands while meditating, he looks at us, and everything is completely dark except a small candle that illuminates his gaze. This is exactly… We might say you were describing this earlier. It might be worth going to see this because it’s completely the Baroque light that you mentioned; it’s there on the Library walls right now.
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
The student: I’ll bring you a catalogue if you don’t have the time to go there because…
Deleuze: I’ve been there, but I didn’t see [the etching] … [Laughter]
The student: Ah, you didn’t see it? Maybe it was too dark!
Deleuze: I know that some people didn’t go because the etchings are as big as that [Deleuze may be indicating they are quite small]. There are some that are… So we’d just need to have someone like you who goes there…
The student: An opaque filter.
Deleuze: Yes, there you have a filter… So, I’d really like even for some among you to think a bit about these stories of Tintoretto and Caravaggio and that you present some research on it if you agree on this direction, on this new status of light. I believe it’s essential, yes, essential, this idea of a dark depth because this will subsequently have some extensions into all of Romanticism, but where, it seems to me, that forms this idea of a dark depth. Fine, so let’s continue.
I believe that henceforth, for us, the most important – this is where I began creating some categories – I remind you that henceforth, we possess our coordinates that allow us to state, to define the Baroque. For, you understand, the Baroque and all that, it’s quite nice, but it’s both too much and it’s also not enough. I mean that, sometimes, we are going in the direction where everything is Baroque, anything at all is Baroque, and sometimes, we go toward directions in which – and now this is becoming like it was a pendulum – in which we are told that the Baroque doesn’t exist and never existed. So, this is our choice, whether we’ve talked about it too much or it doesn’t exist at all and all that, but I find this strange. I find all these stories grotesque because I understand well that someone might say that unicorns never existed [Laughter] or pink panthers, that pink panthers don’t exist. There we have an intelligible proposition. But the Baroque not existing, that seems to me an unintelligible proposition. It’s nonsensical (un non-sens).
It’s not that it necessarily exists. I’m going to say something quite simple. It’s that I can say – [Noise comes from the corridor] Can you close the door, please? – I can say, unicorns don’t exist because I have a determined concept of a unicorn. So I can wonder whether an object corresponding to this concept exists or doesn’t. But the Baroque is a completely different case. I’m being asked to furnish a concept by which the Baroque either exists or doesn’t exist. The Baroque isn’t like a unicorn; it has no reason to exist independently from a concept that causes it to exist or that causes it not to exist so that saying that the Baroque doesn’t exist comes down solely to arguing about them as concept and to denying that concepts about them previously proposed to us might be satisfactory. But by what right does one announce that it’s impossible to construct a concept that might cause the Baroque to exist? That seems strange to me. First, that seems conceited, a process consisting of saying, no, no, you can’t create a concept causing the Baroque to exist. This is completely anti-philosophical. Philosophy being the art of concepts and of the invention of concepts, I don’t see why a concept would be impossible the nature of which would be to cause the Baroque to exist.
So, we have jumped into this topic a bit… Here I’d fully understand if you said, no, no, your concept doesn’t work. Here, fine, then I’d say, good, we have to find another one, but also you could tell me why do you insist on causing the Baroque to exist? And well, why am I insisting on this, after all? I don’t even know myself. [Laughter] Here we are, fine, but if we cannot do so, then at that point, we take another concept that would make something else exist, eh? So, no, fine, but what would be another concept capable of causing the Baroque to exist? Well, I’d say we started from a simple idea: it’s that the Baroque was defined by the fold under two conditions, that the fold be considered as primary and as going to infinity. Why? Well because we all know that the fold is… In the end, everyone has always discussed this, the arts, sciences, etc., all disciplines. It’s everywhere, there are folds everywhere. So, we cannot define the Baroque through the fold. Yes, but we said that it was our departure point. To the extent that the fold goes to infinity, isn’t that the Baroque operation? And we said that the fold that goes to infinity, how could we define it? Well, first, through a tension and through a resolution of the tension.
This tension, what is it? What is the properly Baroque tension? We saw this, or almost. At the outside [it’s] the Baroque scission. There’s an excellent art critic, [Jurgis] Baltrusaitis. In Baltrusaitis, there’s a definition of the fold regarding the novel, of the novel-fold, but we can draw from this a general definition of the fold. He says, it’s the scission of two terms, the fold, but to the extent that in this scission, each of the two terms restarts the other. Yes, in fact, it would be stupid to define the fold through the scission of two terms, but a scission such that each of the two split terms restarts the other. This would be a fold. Fine, we will see what it means, what this definition means. But I am saying, we have seen it, the tension, the Baroque scission: the first coordinate is the scission of the inside and the outside, of the façade and the interior. The façade is no longer adjusted to the structure.[18] It won its independence at the same time that the interior freed itself from the façade. In other words, the façade is full of holes, spongy matter, but the holes only display toward the outside. The outside is always toward the outside. And on the other hand, there is the inside without doors or windows.
So, that’s what the scission of exterior and interior is, and the commentators on the Baroque have greatly insisted on this characteristic of the Baroque church. The façade does not express the interior. The façade does not… [Brief jump in the recording] [1:08:20]
… I am reading an extract here, on the Saint Agnes [church] – Saint Agnes, I believe is in Rome – “The façade is not adjusted to the structure, working only to express itself whereas the interior is closed and yields itself to the gaze” – the gaze of the interior – “to the gaze that discovers it from a single point of view like a chest in which the absolute is resting”.[19] A chest in which the absolute is resting, this is the monad. [Pause] And this… And so, with this tension of interior and exterior as a given, well, let’s assume that it demands a lull, a solution of the tension. Well yes, the solution of the tension will occur when there is something like a reversal (pivotement), and the two split terms become the object of redistribution. The exterior is going to constitute the lower floor, and the infinitely spongy matter the pleats of matter, [Pause] and the pure interior, the without doors or windows, is going to constitute the upper floor. The four coordinates are exterior, interior, upper and lower, with the reversal in which the exterior constitutes the lower, and where the interior constitutes the upper, such that the Baroque characteristic, at that point, will be, first characteristic, the fold going to infinity. The second characteristic: the fold going to infinity would be divided into pleats of matter and folds of the soul. Third characteristic: the pleats of matter form the exterior always in exteriority, [while] the folds in the soul form the absolute interior without neither doors nor windows. Final characteristic: the exterior refers to the lower floor, the interiority to the upper floor. The fold passes between the two floors, which is also to say that light is the fold passing between the spongy matter and the dark depths of the upper room. Hence everything is perfect. Everything is perfect.
The first great theoretician of the fold is Leibniz. But finally… And perhaps we could call “Baroque” those who give to the fold, thus independently of context, independently there, — but allowing that I might be told… Fine, at least we proposed a concept. Let’s apply it. We would call “Baroque” any thinker or any artist for whom the fold would have this dual property, of being the primary principle and of going to infinity, and of going to infinity in the tension and resolution of the tension [between] interior-exterior, upper and lower. All of them we call Leibniz’s disciples. Obviously, there we’d have a strange company since one of the most recent disciples is Heidegger.[20] And why is Heidegger one of Leibniz’s disciples? For a very simple reason, that for Heidegger, everything is fold, and not only fold, but folded in two. This is the famous Zweifalt [Deleuze spells it out], the fold into two, that does not appear from the start in Heidegger. I’m not going to get into a talk on Heidegger here; I refer you to a text for those who wish. I am just pointing out that, in fact, this is a relatively late notion in his thought, and I don’t know… I asked some Heideggerians, and strangely, I never received any answers. They never answer. [Laughter] I’d like to know when the fold into two appeared in Heidegger. Well, then, I don’t know, I don’t know. They don’t seem to be at all certain about this.
But I can point out that in a text from the book Essais et conférences, a text entitled “Moïra”, a very lovely text, there is an entire development on this. This is, it seems to me, the most precise text on what he calls the fold. And you will see the extent to which the fold, in Heidegger, is the differentiator (différenciant), as he says, of being and the Being (l’Étant). This is the articulation of being and Being. This is the split between being and the Being, but such that through the split, each of the terms restarts the other and is inseparable from one another. And on one side, the fold into two airs out (ventile) what? It airs out the appurtenance of thought to being, on one hand, the fold of thought, and on the other hand, it airs out the presence of things present in the world, [Pause] and in this sense, Heidegger states formally that light depends on the fold and not the opposite. [Pause] Good.
But what interests me more than… A great poet of the fold, surely the greatest poet of the fold, is Mallarmé.[21] I’ve already said a few things about this, but here I’d like for you to sense the extent to which the Hérodiade is already the great poem of the fold. Whether this is a chance for you to read or reread and return to this work, were it only to count them up, you will see the number of times that the word “fold” appears, including then the beautiful expression “the yellow folds of thought” (les plis jaunes de la pensée), the yellow folds of thought. To understand what these “yellow folds of thought” are, it would serve you to look at a painting by Tintoretto as well.[22] [See above, no doubt The Last Judgment] This is full, completely full of yellow folds. And in the Hérodiade, you’ll see. You know about Mallarmé, [but] what do you understand? We have to… Are these forms of taste? Are these perversions, as such? He adored kinds of fabric, textiles, anything that created folds.
A woman student [Probably from Claire Parnet]: Perhaps you can unfold your voice a bit?
Deleuze: Unfold my voice? Well of course, but this is because I’ve suffered from… I’m doing what I can. That’s… You couldn’t hear before?
The student: I could hear fine, but I think that the people in the back heard nothing at all.
Deleuze: Ah yes, well, that doesn’t matter. They aren’t protesting. [Laughter] They perhaps are taking a little pity; they are taking pity on me, right? So ok, let’s speak more loudly? Well ok, what was I…
A student [near Deleuze]: The yellow folds…  
Deleuze: Yes, good. In fact, there as well, we will see. The fold is the scission of two; the fold is the scission, but a strange scission that refers one of the two split terms to the other. Why? On one side of the scission, everything is ash, and we perceive in the ashes. I’d like… It’s through the folds of ash, that is, through the folds of fog. To perceive is always to perceive in the folds. But you say, why do you say that? What does all that mean? To which I can answer, if you said that to me, just let yourself go. I don’t know why. I don’t know why. As if… But yes… Is all perception… Isn’t this a way in which all perception is a little hallucinatory? I see things through fog, the opening of the fog. You’ll tell me, everybody isn’t like that. Ah, well very good! And the Baroque is like that! They see through a fog, through the holes in a veil, as through a spongy matter, “fold after fold” (pli selon pli).
Fold after fold, what is this? It’s a famous expression from Mallarmé. [Pause; Deleuze looks into his copy of Mallarmé] I am reading randomly, in a few poems: “O fogs, arise!” This is a very, very, very twisted poem. [He reads from Mallarmé’s “The Blue” (Azur)] “O fogs, arise ! Pour your monotonous ashes down / With long rags of dust.”[23] Long rags of dust, are you feeling this? This is starting to fold in. “Pour your monotonous ashes down / With long rags of dust from the skies”. Bruges, “Bruges reveals itself in the early morning”.[24] Bruges, where’s Bruges? “All the nearly incense-colored outdatedness” – here too, we have ashes – “All the nearly incense-colored outdatedness / As furtively and visibly I feel / The stone widow unveiled fold after fold”.[25] [Deleuze rereads this slowly aloud] The stone widow unveils fold after fold; the folds, right, of the fog, folds of the falling fog. I see through the folds of fog while folding in and varying its fold, the fog allows something to appear. This is what perception in the folds is. And I only see the things through the dust that it stirs up itself, and I cannot see them otherwise. Here we have Baroque perception, such that the conditions in which I see the things at the same time denounce the inanity of things, the vanity of things, the emptiness of things. You know, this is a constant theme in Mallarmé, this inanity, this absence of things, this emptiness of things. It means that at the same time that I grasp the presence of things through the dust that it stirs up, I grasp this presence as vain, inane, useless. This is the regime of perception in the folds. This is a kind of hallucinatory perception. [Pause]
An author that Mallarmé greatly admired was called Thomas De Quincey. In a marvelous text entitled The Revolt of the Tartars, Thomas De Quincey tells the following story: an entire people, a whole Tartar tribe is in flight, fleeing from the Russian empire and go join up with the emperor of China. They arrive – they have experienced, it seems, horrible suffering, and it’s a terrible epic tale, terrible, and finally they arrive near the palace of the emperor of China, who is strolling in his garden and sees far off some strange dust, and this text is a model of perception in the folds. I will read it to you:
“[When] the gentle morning breeze had a little freshened, the dusty vapor had developed itself far and wide into the appearance of huge aerial draperies, hanging in the mighty volumes from the sky to the earth ; and at particular points, where the eddies of the breeze acted upon the pendulous skirts of these aerial curtains,” [Deleuze repeats the previous phrase] “rents were perceived, sometimes taking the form of regular arches, portals, and windows, through which began dimly to gleam the heads of camels ‘indorsed’ with human beings – and at intervals the moving men and horses in tumultuous array – and then through other openings or vistas at far distant points the flashing of polished arms. But sometimes, as the wind slackened or died away, all those openings, of whatever form, in the cloudy pall would slowly close, and for a time the whole pageant was shut up from view.”[26]
There you have the perception in the waves of fog, perception in the folds. Notice, necessarily, perception in the folds, once again, is that which grasps things through the bits of dust, through the dust, and why? Because the same things give rise to their own dust: this is its inanity. That’s what Baroque perception is. You will see that through the veil of dust that the things raise up from themselves the presence of things present. This is the veil of dust that also hides presence.
Good, one will have to see… But here, we’re not yet… I am stating that it will be very normal for Leibniz to furnish us with a theory of perception when one will fully have to expect that it will be innovative and extraordinarily rich, and that it will have as ground the veiled, quasi-hallucinatory steps, the dizziness, the dizziness, the uproar (rumeur), that is, all the forms that we can already situate under the name of perception in the folds. And thus, this is perception in the very object and of an infinitely spongy matter, caverns that never cease digging out new caverns. We see through holes, and holes that recreate themselves, etc. The things raise up their own dust, like a horse, right, a horse that we only perceive momentarily when the dust that it raised up allows us to see it, and it’s still a horse. And what matters? Isn’t dust closer to the nature of things than the horse itself? Fine.
But on the other side, on the other side of the fold – there the fold swarms on one side; it swarms on the side of hallucinatory perception, of perception in the fold. — But on the other side, what is there? You recall, this is from having followed the exterior line or the line of the lower floor. But within the beautiful interiority or the upper floor, what am I going to have? Let’s follow Mallarmé. The fold par excellence, what is it in Mallarmé? You know the fold par excellence. It’s the fan. It’s the fan. [Pause] And [Deleuze looks in his text] they belong to the very great poems by Mallarme, the poems written on fans, notably here, the poem “Fan for Madame Mallarmé,” and the other, “Fan for Mademoiselle Mallarmé”.
And in “Fan for Madame Mallarmé,” there is this: “Limpidly (where will fall / Pursued grain by grain / A bit of invisible ash / Alone to cause me pain).”[27] Fine, what is this here? The open fan, you see? [Deleuze seems to demonstrate with a fan] The fan is unfolded, becoming the open fan that, through its movement, causes to rise and fall the imperceptible fog of tiny bits of ash. I see into the fan’s folds, that is, through the ashes. [Pause] “Limpidly… a bit of invisible…” etc. “a bit of invisible ash / Alone to cause me pain,” since as a condition of perception, it denounces whatever it reveals.
And in the other “Fan”, the fan is closed, not immediately, but in any case, toward the end. Why? Here, we have this: “Do you feel the sullen paradise / Like laughter wearing shrouds / Flowing from the corner of your mouth / In the depth of the unanimous fold!”[28] Someone capable of expressing, of using this expression, “the unanimous fold,” I can say that – and it’s only a tribute to him – that this is not only a great poet, but is a Baroque poet. “The unanimous fold,” and the last, final stanza is: “The scepter of pink embankments / Inert on golden evening, this is it [Deleuze spells out the letters of these last three words: “ce l’est, C-E L-apostrophe-E-S-T”] / This closed white flight that you place / Against the fire of a bracelet.”[29] I say here, what is this? It’s no longer the open fan.  “The scepter of pink embankments,” this is the closed fan, which is confirmed – two verses down – by “This closed white flight that you place / Against the fire of a bracelet.” [Deleuze repeats these two verses] This indeed interests me, this appeal to light, and this time, it’s the fold from within. You see, we have passed from the fold toward the outside that links to the hallucinatory perception onto the fold of the inside, the monad, the fold in the soul, the unanimous fold.
Good? And what is that? Well, we have seen it a bit. The fold on that side is what? It’s the fold that goes beyond itself, it’s the fold of thought, it’s the fold in thought. It’s no longer perceiving into the folds. It’s the fold as condition of thought. And what is the fold as condition of thought? Mallarmé tells it to us, in a text that we have seen, if only quickly. [Pause; Deleuze looks in his text.] “The folding . . . does not strike as much as its layerings, [in thickness], offering the tiny tomb, certainly, of the soul.”[30] Fine. On the side of thought, the fold goes beyond itself toward the… [Interruption in the recording] [1:33:04]
Part 3
… the soul, it’s the monad, good, it’s the monad, but finally, if it’s the monad, what is it ? In Mallarmé, it’s the unknown, it’s what he calls the Book. It’s the Book. You remember? We have seen this in Leibniz: in the end, the monad is a reading room. Each monad reads the world in itself. Good. Well, yes, Mallarmé’s Book, the Book that is a world, the world-Book, that is a Combinatory, that layers an infinity of foldings that can be unfolded in a variable order, that is, the Book in infinite combinations. This is exactly the Leibnizian monad. [Pause]
So, on one side, you have the fundamental text of the fold, I’d say, the fan fold that, on one hand, opens itself to the exterior in the hallucinatory perception, [and] on the other hand, closing itself, it layers itself in the interior in thought, and each of the terms restarts the other. In what form? In the very beautiful form that greatly moved Mallarmé, specifically there are two things that are folded, that are nonetheless opposed, but that never stop restarting each other: the newspaper which is pure circumstance, dust and ash; the newspaper is a fold, the folds of the newspaper; and on the other hand, the Book which itself is also folded, but it’s an entirely different order of fold than the newspaper. It’s no longer the folds of the newspaper, circumstance, dust and ash. It’s the fold of the Book, layerings of the Book, event. [Pause]
There we are; as a result, it seems to me, in a certain way, that what I have just done here rather quickly, regarding two authors, Heidegger and Mallarmé, is trying to show how we could discover in them our coordinates, our coordinates of the exterior and the interior, of the upper and the lower. For finally, once again, and I’d like to be done with this once and for all, that is… You understand, it’s true that the fold… So, we started from this as an idea of… But in the process of trying to develop it, we realized, in fact, that the fold, but, well, it’s everywhere. It’s everywhere. I mean, it goes without saying that it’s difficult to create plastic arts, or a history of plastic arts without encountering this problem that encumbers both painting and sculpture. So a history of the fold would consist in showing that the regime of the fold since, for example, Egyptian bas-reliefs, Greek sculpture, I’m skipping ahead, the Romanesque, the Gothic, fine… For example, in his last book, Formations, déformations, Baltrusaitis wrote a final chapter, in fact extremely engaging, on the Gothic fold, in architecture. And how does he define the Gothic fold from his framework? He defines it as the scission of two terms that restart each other, finally, towards the scission. But the scission that, according to him, determines the Gothic – and here, this is very important for me so that there’s no confusion – he says, it’s a perpetual scission of the figurative and the geometric. I mean, for example, the sculptor creates a figure, and the fold, for example, the folds of the garment restart an entire system of then purely geometric lines, and the exuberance of these geometric lines is going to revive a figure that will again yield a geometric line, etc.
This is why I tell myself, fine, the Gothic fold, perhaps that’s what it is, but it’s not what the Baroque fold is at all. We ourselves didn’t define the Baroque fold as a function of a, yet again, figurative-geometric scission, but as a function of an interior-exterior scission, which is completely different. And at that point, for us, perhaps there are other types of scissions; perhaps, in the West, perhaps the history began with Greece. Why not since…? With Greece, what occurs, because on the plastic level, what is the scission? I’d say that it’s between the plane surface and the body which is not the same thing as the figure and the abstract line. [With] the plane surface of the garment and the body, you have these two poles. There’s indeed a scission, and you can relieve, resolve the scission, the tension, through one pole or the other.  For example, you can give the privilege to the plane surface; simply, you divide it into flat folds to which the body adapts itself. It’s the flat fold that is going to resolve the surface-corporeal volume tension. Inversely, you can resolve the tension on the side of the body and of corporeal volume, notably when, for example, the rhombus replaces the bas-relief. At that point, you no longer have the flat fold, but the fold that creates shadow. The flat fold doesn’t make a shadow. It’s a great period in Greek sculpture when the fold begins making a shadow. No doubt it’s a new order of light as well. In its own way, the Baroque never stops returning to this requirement that the fold is a luminous relief that creates shadow. Fine, but it’s not only… You understand? It’s everywhere. I was telling you, from the start of our work this year, we have seen the extent to which natural history, the living, was a matter of the fold, created a fold of the body, but in mathematics, the inflections, and all that, we have seen all that, and in the end, there are folds everywhere. So, yet again, [there’s] the necessity of marking precisely the very coordinates of the Baroque, if one wants to create them, if one wants to create out of the Baroque a grand theory of the fold. This must not be confused with just anything, with just any other period.
And I am just saying, but perhaps it’s the aggregate of philosophy that is in play, the aggregate of thought because, after all, because Plato was seeking – let’s go back here to the Greeks as well – when Plato was seeking a model both for the mechanism of thought and for political power, royal power, [Pause] What is he going to propose to us?[31] He proposes, precisely in a text that he calls Politics, he proposes the model or the paradigm of weaving, with two principal figures, the twisting of the thread and the interlacing of warp and woof. And political power, according to him, is going to result from this, or the model of political power will result from this. Fine, this is already a lot, but I am telling myself, such a model, such a paradigm, you know, it seems to me it only concerns components that we can call components of matter, the warp, the woof, the thread’s twisting. And it’s not at all that… I believe that Plato deliberately does this to situate himself on the level of the components of matter. In other words, he doesn’t reach the fold. However, he doesn’t ignore the fold. He doesn’t reach the formal element of the fold. I’d say that he stays – and that will be important for what I have left to say here; this is getting a bit confusing – he stays in textures, and textures are very important. I’d say that he stays in the matter, he stays in the pleats of matter, and he wants to stay there. For Plato doesn’t ignore the fold as element of form, but he reserves it for other occasions. That doesn’t mean that he was Baroque, and he made of the fold an entirely different concept from the one we have just seen.
But then, I tell myself, fine, we’d have to… Could we construct a model that wouldn’t be one of the weaver or of weaving? Because instead of remaining content with textures, he would reach the formal element of the fold. What would that be? Would this be such a paradigm, and could it function? You understand, we can always try. We have to see in all… Look, I am posing… For the moment, we are going to see why I am occupying myself with this opposition, the textures with components of matter, and on the other hand, the fold as formal element. So, the thread’s twisting, the weft-woof intermixing, this is texture. But I am saying, let’s try for a model that reaches the formal element of the fold, that is, so I’d almost go, at that point, — sense that we aren’t far from the Baroque – I’d say that it’s a “Mannerist” model, a Mannerist model. [Pause] And after all, we know that Mallarmé had a great dream that he achieved for too short a time for his taste, which was to direct a fashion review. Directing a fashion review was something quite important to him. He directed a review that nonetheless had seven, eight issues, nine issues, I think, that have been republished here, something certainly of interest. I haven’t read it; I’ve just seen the table of contents that are in the Pléaide edition.[32]
And then there’s also a disturbing case, where one most ask the question: but, in all this, what’s going on? Have we entered into a complete pathology or are we still in the realm of philosophy? [Laughter] I mean, there’s someone famous – or famous in certain circles – a great psychiatrist from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries – he died not long before the war, I believe [1934] – Clérambault, he was called Clérambault, with an odd taste for fabrics and folds. And this psychiatrist, Gaëtan de Clérambault, who was director of an infirmary, the psychiatric director of the special infirmary, so he nonetheless had a very official role – [A noise comes from voices in the corridor, interrupting the class] Ah, this is so annoying. [Pause]… Close the door firmly as you go out. – … This psychiatrist that had a very official function, well he had a taste for folds, but an extremely upsetting taste, and notably, he created small, little statues; he arrayed [on them] the pleated fabrics and displayed a lot of things. He died; he killed himself. That created some scandal; his suicide caused a scandal, and it was widely said that the psychiatrist was a fetishist. Well, why not? We can say that about Mallarmé’s shawl, and about just about anything. That’s not at all what’s interesting. What’s interesting is listening to Clérambault and what he has to say about this. For, in fact, he created photos, and some admirable photos of Moroccan women, and of the pleated fabrics that he arranged on these Moroccan women in these photos; these were very lovely things. And on the other hand, he achieved his life’s ambition as well. It was to present a lecture at the Ethnographic Society on pleated fabric and its history, and he did this.
And I am saying, it seems of so little interest to undertake the psychoanalysis of Doctor Clérambault. [Laughter] On the other hand, what interests me a lot is that, for Clérambault, the fold is the formal element of fabric, and this is the way in which I am claiming a Mannerist paradigm, a formal paradigm, a formal model. – [Yet again, noise from the corridor interrupts the class] Aaaahhhh, [Pause] but why do they stay pressed like that up against the door? Here you have some perverts! [Laughter] Yes, well fine – Yes! How did that organize itself in his mind? Clérambault is a specialist in two things that interested him greatly in psychiatry, these two things: what he himself called passion-related deliria, and on the other hand, hallucinations. At that period, there were lots of them, hallucinations with ether, so-called chloral hallucinations, and the hallucinations with ether are sometimes so-called Lilliputian hallucinations, minuscule hallucinations. Fine. It’s an entire stage of hallucinatory perception. And he explains that Lilliputian hallucinations never ceased creating folds in place. That’s on the side of perception.
On the side of thought, I believe that diagnostic thought, that diagnostic thought is fundamentally a thought of the fold and thought that unfolds, especially in the case of passion-related deliria. For the problem of passion-related deliria that Clérambault showed very well, it’s that the subject gets less delirious in thought; the delirium of ideas isn’t apparent. The delirium of thought is even non-existent. We don’t get delirious in ideas. It’s a delirium-action. [Pause] Suddenly, there’s an act. Because of that, the passion-related delirium is more dangerous than the rest because it passes into act. This is the passage into the novel act such that Clérambault has a very disturbing expression insofar as he was director of the special facility of the infirmary. He goes on to say:  patients like this, right, cannot be interrogated; they necessarily have to be outmaneuvered. They necessarily have to be outmaneuvered because if they are interrogated, they are as reasonable as us. In fact, it’s delirium in action. So there, undoing the fold, we see well that diagnostic thought is distressing. Good. The perception in the fold of the ether-induced hallucinating patient as much as medical thought of the diagnostic that undoes the fold, all of that is going to allow him to observe the paradigm, the model that is no longer a material model, but that is a formal model of the fold.
And in fact, in his lecture to the Society that has been republished – I mean, you can find that in a very interesting little book, edited by four young psychiatrists under the title The Passion for Fabrics of a Neuro-psychiatrist, Gaëtan de Clérambault [1981], in which there are Clérambault’s texts and then there are splendid photos of Moroccan women that are very, very astonishing as research on folds. It’s very good, very good. Fine, I mean, what interests me is that when we read Clérambault’s lecture, we might wish to distinguish three great categories:  the folds, that goes without saying, there’s no need, but that gives us… fold; hems – [A new interruption occurs from voices in the corridor] They really are pains in the ass there (chiants)… Not human… — the folds, the hems, and the drapes. We could even list more of them. Yes, the fold would be defined as we did it there, the scission of two terms in the conditions such that each term restarts the other. For example, you speak about a fold in a curtain.
A hem is like a very special fold, and Clérambault discovers — he made this discovery, I don’t know if it’s true — but yes, the Greeks had hems since specialists in plastic arts have maintained that the Greeks didn’t make hems, and that the Greek tunic was without hems. Clérambault absolutely rejects this and believes to have brought forth proof that the Greeks, that the Greek tunic had hems. And that’s a lot more interesting than psychiatry anyway! [Enormous laughter] So, hems are very special folds since these are folds that complete, folds that complete, folds that fold back in.
And finally, what is the drape? Your curtain makes folds; it drops down while making folds, but if you place it… I’m going to take a very simple example: if you hook [the drape] into a wall attachment (brassière), there you have a drape. What is that defines the drape? A point of support, [Pause] and a movement, a movement that the fold takes as a function of this point of support, and third, eventually, a variation of this movement according to exterior actions, a regulated variation of this movement according to exterior actions. Fine.
That’s where I wanted to arrive. As a way to end this study of the fold, there we have a list of categories that, in this way, I’d like not to propose to you, but for you to reflect on a bit: simple folds – eh? We are making categories of the fold – and there would first be simple folds; in second place, our second site, there would be composite folds; in third place, there would be hems; in fourth place, there would be drapes; in fifth place, the aggregate of textures, components of matter and no longer, as before, components of forms – the four preceding [categories] are components of forms – components of matter, all the textures, which would give us, for example, think about this, in painting, the great painters of textures – there aren’t so many – the great painters of textures, of recent date, I’m not speaking of the past, but in recent painters, there were two great painters of textures, Klee and Dubuffet. And there is perhaps… No, what I am saying here is stupid, there are others, there are obviously others, but in short, two among the greatest are Klee and Dubuffet in which, manifestly, texture truly appears as a component of matter, of the painting’s material. Fine, and then, even [with] the textures then, there are several categories, and this will be up to us to determine them, all the categories of textures.
So, we would have four of them [categories] plus X categories of textures. And finally, the categories of – they would connect, if you will, to the models of weaving, but with all kinds of forms of weaving. A bit of… What Plato did, we can do on the level of the fold, I mean, so this is no longer surprising. And finally, there would even be an underneath what is not woven, the nearly raw components of matter, notably the agglomerates, the agglomerates, of what type? Well, no longer woven, no longer textile, no longer texture, but felt (feutre), the felt; it’s an agglomerate, and no longer a textile. I mean, you define the textile by texture, specifically by the fact that a thread passes over and under, the thread of the warp. A thread of the woof passes under and over, [and] that creates a textile. But felt is not a textile; it’s a conglomerate, an agglomerate. So you would have textures and agglomerates with no doubt a single category – still, it’s not certain – a single category for the agglomerate, but a lot of categories for texture.[33]
So, we would have the whole list of categories. And I am saying, what did Leibniz do? And once again, it’s not… I am not at all trying to play the clown. If Plato did this for weaving, why would Leibniz… [Deleuze does not finish this] I believe, we have seen, that simple folds for Leibniz, look at the text with which we began, it was our first text of the year:[34] In understanding, understanding is covered with tapestries, but the tapestry creates some folds, and these are simple notions. Simple notions are veritable folds in God’s understanding. [Pause]
Second point: the composite folds would no longer be simple notions. These are the definitions and demonstrations and linkages of definitions resulting from them. A definition implies at least two terms; it combines, it composes. [Pause] If you recall what we anticipated – so here, I am going very quickly because… — the hems would be what? It seems to me that it’s the position in Leibniz of the requisites. In fact, the requisites set off boundaries for domains; there where requisites were situated, a domain begins. And God’s understanding, in fact, encompassed simple notions, linked definitions, and requisites. The requisites are typically hems.
Obviously, we have saved the most beautiful one for the monad. What is the monad if not a drape? Why is the monad a drape? I’m going to tell you: you recall… — [Again, the class is interrupted by noise from the corridor] Aaaaahhhh… But is it even possible for the door to be shut? [A woman student speaks from the corridor: Excuse me, but I have a class; are you finishing up?] You have a class? [A student near Deleuze: It’s at three thirty.] You don’t have a class at all! [The student from the corridor: You’re here until what time?] Until two o’clock… Until two o’clock every Tuesday. [The student from the corridor: Inaudible] What? [The student from the corridor: If you had written it, I would have known…] What would you have known? [The student from the corridor: That you were here!] [Noise of voices; Deleuze speaks to students nearby him trying to understand] Isn’t it marked there? [A student near Deleuze: Certainly!] She got the wrong room number, this idiot! [A student near Deleuze: All she had to do was read…] Ah, so [now] she understood… [Pause]
Yes, good, it’s all very simple, you see? The point of support is exactly the monad’s reference to a point of view, and the very movement that the fabric takes as a function of the point of view, that is, as a function of the point of support, this will be precisely the reason of the movement in the monad, a regulated variation of movement under the impulsions, in the sense and only in the sense of the comparison of the monad with a drape. Good, all this is… I mean simply that, [it’s] on the level of textures, so we will find ourselves, in fact, faced with a series of Leibniz’s distinctions that we can only examine at the time that we consider matter. When we consider matter, we will see the whole problem of the series of textures. All the pleats of matter that are going to have some extremely different types, for example, physical matter or living matter, there they are going to refer us to different textures, all the way to what Leibniz calls the Agglomerates since he is going distinguish fundamentally the organisms and the accumulations (amas). [Pause]
So there you have what I was proposing to you; it’s a review to finish up with the second part [of the course]. It remains for me only to draw some final conclusion and about a point that is relatively important for me because we must conceive of it as very scholarly. This point is that all of my second part has consisted in the end of analyzing the upper floor. In our entire second part, we have analyzed, in fact, ideal inflections, inclusion in the monad, the compossibility of worlds, and the individual’s freedom. Nearly… We have practically finished with the upper floor.
What would just be needed, and what I’d like from some of the more philosophical among you than others, would be to work out some of the conclusions on what Leibniz’s conception of substance is. So, this conception, I’d like to try to state it because it’s obviously very important, and to state it as a function of this [what’s preceded] and while having in mind the idea of persuading you of something: that always, when one says that philosophers don’t get along with each other, that they never have the same theories, the theories change, etc., this is idiotic. It’s all the more idiotic since, necessarily, they don’t agree among themselves because words have extremely precise meanings. You cannot do philosophy if you don’t know, if you don’t have a relatively strong lexicon. So, it’s not at all that there are theories of substance. There, that’s idiotic. But what’s true is that “substance” signifies something very precise, and the question is of knowing: what does that signify? So, that’s what I would like to do for you, and then afterward would come – and we will do this next time – would come the moment I have eagerly awaited, a comparative study of both Leibniz and Whitehead. And you see your future: then, once we’ve seen Whitehead, all that will remain for us is one thing, the theory of matter, and the conception of texture and matter in Leibniz. There you have it!
So, substance, I’d just like to begin a little bit.[35] I mean we would have to take up perhaps three fundamental reference points. Of course, there’s Descartes since Leibniz says nothing about substance without having Descartes in mind, without engaging in a kind settling of scores with Descartes. So there’s Descartes, and then there is Aristotle; there is Aristotle in some strange conditions since Descartes created his theory of substance apparently against Aristotle, and Leibniz doesn’t hesitate to associate himself with Aristotle, resuscitate Aristotle against Descartes. But, in fact, nor does he hesitate to invoke Descartes when for himself he wants to be distanced from Aristotle. In fact, it’s perpetually a three-way arrangement. So, what I mean here is that I am above all looking for points of agreement.
And there’s a very important agreement point, [Deleuze searches in his book] there’s a very important agreement point that is [about] what everyone in the end called substance because, still, there was no choice. What do people call substance? Well, I believe that everyone agrees on two points. [Pause] Substance or a substance is concrete or, if you prefer, the determinate, the completely determined, that is, the individual. That’s what substance means. Substance is the thing, it’s the thing. And there, it’s not a question of taste; there aren’t… One cannot say that there are philosophers who use the word substance in another sense; it’s not true. This is why it interests me, you can understand, I hope [that] what philosophy is [arises] from examples of this type. It’s not true. Any, any philosopher using the word substance can only mean one thing. With this, he designates a concrete, a determined individual.
Aristotle will say — in Greek, [for] those who have studied it a bit, [Greek words unclear], a this, a this. Or he will say further, substance is the Being [l’étant], it’s the Being, and the question of substance is not at all what the Being is, but who is Being? Or if you prefer, who Being (qui étant)? Who the Being? Who is the Being? There’s the question of substance. And Descartes says nothing different. For Descartes, substance is the concrete, the determined individual. Substance, Descartes tells us, is stone (la pierre), it’s not the extension (étendue) in general. It’s a particular determined extension. It’s what is extended; it’s not extension. Extension is an attribute, but what is extended, that’s substance. In other words, what is substance is always a part of extent.
As we’ve seen and I’m not even insisting on it, Leibniz, but it’s to say the extension to which it’s not – you understand? – It’s already an enormous misunderstanding to say that Leibniz’s difference with others is that, for Leibniz, substance is the individual. It’s true that, in Leibniz, substance is the individual, but in this regard, it’s not terribly new. I mean, the worst misunderstanding is when, considering an author or a writer, you grant him or her merit for what he or she doesn’t deserve because that causes you to pass over what his or her true sources of greatness are. The idea that substance is individual, well, it’s a commonplace; it’s a commonplace since the word substance has been in use, that is, since Aristotle. Good, so Leibniz is like Descartes and like Aristotle.
And the second more important point is that substance has always designated for everyone a subject of inherence, that is, this into which, this into which. And there as well, it’s very important since there is no doubt that Leibniz creates of inherence a profoundly original conception when he tells us [that] the monad contains or encompasses the entire world. Likewise, Leibniz creates a thoroughly original conception of the individual, we have seen, the individual as condensing of singularities. But what interests me is still not that. What interests me is the extent to which he speaks – yes, there’s a kind of deep coquetry here – he speaks of… he says, but what are you making objections to me about? He says, I am only saying what everyone says; I’m simply taking that seriously. Other people tell us things, and then they don’t know how to handle them. Everything occurs as if Leibniz told us, everyone agrees on this, [that] substance is individual. And fine, I’m going to show you where that leads us. Or else, everyone agrees on that, that substance is a subject of inherence, that is, it’s this into which. Well, I’m going to show you.
But in fact, Descartes and Aristotle have always said that substance was a subject of inherence. That’s what’s funniest in the end, if I dare say; it’s not… But it’s what seems the funniest to me. For them as well, it was a subject of inherence. The proof: Aristotle tells us, substance is distinguished from the accident, and what is the accident? It’s what is present in substance. The definition of the accident is what is present in substance. [Pause] Descartes tells us, substance is subject of its own determinations. Its own determinations are present in substance such that Leibniz must certainly tell everyone who are then raising points of objection to him, he says, he answers, but you know, I’ve done nothing other than say what Aristotle said. Aristotle always said [that] accidents are present in substance. Me, I’m saying nothing different. Ah, this is very strange.
Fine, but what is going to happen in fact? What’s going to happen? It’s this: what prevents others from going all the way to the end of these two points, substance is the individual [and] substance is the subject of inherence? What’s going to hold them back? I believe that two things hold them back. [Pause] The first thing is that, fine, accident is present in substance. So, substance is a subject of inherence. But there is at least one kind of determination that isn’t of this type, it’s the attribute. One must distinguish attribute and accident. That’s already some pure Aristotle. I am saying that in order to underscore the strange resemblances between Aristotle and Descartes. It’s already Aristotle who says, Be careful, the accident is present in substance, but the attribute cannot be stated present in substance, but [it’s] that which is very different, it’s said from substance, it’s affirmed from substance. For example, if I say, the man is white, white is present in the substance man. But if I say the man is reasonable, reasonable is not present in man, but is a predicate of man, attribute of man, it’s said about man. [Pause]
Likewise in Descartes, [Pause] substance has an essential attribute and without an essential attribute, we cannot know substance. The essential attribute of corporeal substance is extension. The essential attribute of spiritual substance is thought. [Pause] And there it is, that on the level of attributes as well, that is, they will call it essence; the attribute in its difference with the accident, it’s the essence of substance. And there we see that the essence of substance brings back the entire generality that substance repudiated. Whereas substance defined itself as subject of inherence and individual, the attribute as essence is going to be a general determination, extension in general, thought in general, to the extent that Aristotle is going to call it a second substance, essence, a second substance. He is going to define it by the general form. And Descartes is going to name it essence, and from the point of view of essence, then, we will have at least the impression that bodies, individual bodies, are no more than modes of extension, and no longer substance. Do you see?
So there we are, my question will remain here. I am going to take this up again next time. My question is exactly: henceforth, what are the criteria of substance in Descartes, taking account of what we’ve just said, and what are going to be the criteria of substance according to Leibniz? So this is scholarly, but I really insist on it. So we will do it next time, but we will start with Whitehead. [Momentary end of the session] [2:19:04]
[Supplementary fragment: as indicated in the introductory note, Deleuze seems to continue discussion following the end of class based on questions posed by remaining students.]
… [Mallarmé’s problem] is where does literature as art start? Is all writing already literature? So, of course, if you take the… It’s because, you do not know generally… When we say, that doesn’t appeal to me, this means that we are not fully living the problem. Mallarmé lives the problem in a very vital way which is, if I write you a letter telling you, yes, I confirm our meeting for tomorrow at 4 o’clock; or else, I write to you a letter about, for example, a love letter; third case, I write a letter to you about substance in Leibniz. I ask you where does philosophy start or else, where does art start? In my letter about the meeting, did I say, well then, how do we make the difference? If there is, if there is a difference, where does it pass through? This is what fascinated Mallarmé. For example, he writes two verses on a fan or in a young lady’s album – at that period, that happened a lot; he writes a little verse in an autograph notebook – is this already art? Is it not art? Is it circumstantial? Is a letter of circumstance art? Fine, if you tell me yes, it’s already art, but if I write in a newspaper, is it art? Does this belong to something new or not? So this kind of problem interested him. Is all writing already art or already marked by the grasp of or attempt at the beautiful, etc.?
So there, this takes a direction. Saying that there are two kinds of folds, the newspaper fold that is a fold of circumstance, and the book fold that’s a fold of the event, this consists in saying, yes, it’s indeed like two poles, the two poles of non-art writing and art writing. But that’s not enough; it’s a problem. For precisely both being folded signifies for Mallarmé that both of them are participating, that we won’t ever be able to establish, never be able to establish where the border passes exactly that causes writing to become art suddenly; one doesn’t just become so, and this is like a kind of fold going to infinity.
So in the end, you tell me, fine, I’m considering your expression, I’m considering your expression, and I don’t get it, this idea from Mallarmé, the newspaper fold, the book fold. You don’t get it because it seems arbitrary to you.  And I am telling you – and this is in no way a reproach I’m making – that it only seems arbitrary to you because you aren’t posing the problem concretely enough for him, as he did it. If you wish, it’s an illustration… The distinction of the newspaper fold and the book fold for Mallarmé is an illustration of this question. So, if the problem also doesn’t interest you, you necessarily wouldn’t get the problem. I’m not saying that a problem necessarily has to interest everyone, but the problem that interests Mallarmé is precisely this problem of the relation between writing with art and with non-art. You understand? That means, where does poetry start? Where does philosophy start? Is it, in a certain way, it’s, it’s, it’s, yes, it’s… You understand?
A student: No…
Deleuze: No… Perfect, so if you don’t understand, it means that the problem is completely closed off to you… Yes?
The student: That’s not it, that is, this isn’t the question.
Deleuze: Ah, I see!
The student: For me, the problem is what are the coordinates of the fold, interior [coordinates] that is, because it goes to infinity, so how can we define it, because I wanted to ask this question: if it’s not completely a fold, what is it? We’d like to have some coordinates, some coordinates for this in order to understand. I understood what there is on the exterior; that I understand. But, the second side, I haven’t understood this. I take this aspect as not being coherent, to remain obscure. I find that it seems to contradict itself on that. That’s what my question is: for Mallarmé, what are these sides [some inaudible word], but this is my problem, I understand. What did you mean by that?
Deleuze: This is your problem not understanding what I said. [Pause] As for me, I’d like you to sense the extent to which I am sincere when I say, you know, if you follow along with me over a year, you will reach some very different intentions. I believe that those who can propose to themselves to understand what I am saying – it’s not that what I am saying is very difficult, and I don’t have any preference for them – these are philosophers or those with a philosophical background. I believe that the others have a different mode of comprehension, that is entirely equal to a philosophical mode of comprehension, but one that is much more discontinuous and much freer, which is… It’s very possible that, if you follow me, what I am saying might mean nothing to you two times in a row, and then suddenly, you get something from it another time. Those that are not primarily philosophers; I believe that when they come [to class], it’s a bit in there area of “is this working for me today, or not working?” Suddenly… It has to, at that point… A problem that I’m considering or posing has to encounter one of your own problems. So, in my view, this happens quite often – and it’s the sense of philosophy that I don’t at all believe that there are perpetually encounters between philosophers and other disciplines – at that point, in fact, it has to plug into one of your problems.
So, among you, I could say, among the non-philosophers, I am certain that there are some for whom it’s extremely clear immediately, these Mallarmé questions. For example, if I undertake a personal journal, take three categories: household accounts, I organize my expenses; I maintain a personal journal; and I’m writing a book. Are all three literature? Are only two of them such? Only one? Where does the fold that will be airing start, etc.? Fine, I assume that there are some who can be interested in this. I take today’s session. Myself, I see no difficulty in some who might have… who haven’t at all reacted to all these stories about drapes, hems, all of that, and that they might be thinking, what is it with all this crap (conneries)? [Laughter] It’s entirely my business whether I feel a need to discuss this, but it’s not in order to convince you. And then, on the other hand, [there are some] who grasped something when we were discussing painting and told themselves, there’s something I can do with this. It’s not that… You don’t have the right to say this is good, that’s not good…. Well, yes, in fact, you have every right to do so! But that’s not what matters. What matters is if you find something that speaks to you. So, if drapes don’t speak to you at all, or hems, that’s fine, it’s not bad, eh? Even I find that all that doesn’t speak much to me! [Laughter] But maybe painting speaks to you, and at that point, fine, we’ve accomplished our session’s goal. For me, I believe that, to some extent, for philosophers, concepts speak to them, but also for them, and not everything is of interest.
So I mean… I no longer really know what I mean. [Laughter] I mean that among the non-philosophers who come here, it’s because you have an aggregate of problems, coming from other horizons than philosophy, and that can achieve clarification just as for me, my problems have always found clarifications, extraordinary ones for me, once I encounter – even here, you’re being charming – well, there are people who have taught me things – I’m talking about previous years so that I’m not flattering anyone – but there are people who have taught me some things that are entirely… [Deleuze doesn’t finish] because, because there were encounters between problems. I believe that philosophy has no kind of privilege. It has its kinds of problems, and these can reverberate with problems in mathematics or aesthetics, and inversely, problems of aesthetics can reverberate.
So, if you tell me that a problem doesn’t speak to me, well I tell you, you’re right! This is why we should never argue. It’s not in order to persuade you that a problem is interesting. If it doesn’t speak to you, it doesn’t speak to you. Some other time we’ll see something better, or else, if no problem at all speaks to you, fine, you don’t have… You just won’t come any more. But I mean, everything is fine, to some extent. [Laughter] Everything is fine once you find your problems, right? I believe that’s what counts. [Inaudible question] What?
A student: [Inaudible question]
But I believe that Leibniz teaches us a lot, that it’s this story of each person’s subdivision (département). Certainly, we are limited; we have our subdivision; we have our problems, we have… I don’t think that this is why, I don’t think that, for example, Gaëtan de Clérambault was a fetishist, or he was, but not only that. His relation to fabrics was an aggregate of problems, and this wasn’t a complex. Fine, that goes well enough. So, from this perspective, it’s more interesting, because art history… You know, there are stores in Paris that I wanted to look at in order to try to bring in some concepts for you, [Laughter] and there are all kinds of boutiques with pleated fabrics, French pleats, assembled pleats (plissé réuni), all that, and I was hoping to have an entire list of folds. [Laughter] So I would have had 92 categories and not ten, and then I told myself that this procedure was rather suspect, [Laughter] that somewhere, this wasn’t a good way to go, that there was reason for holding back a drape or one of the folds, that it was already… no.
There we are, so listen…
A student: Can I say something?
Deleuze: Yes, certainly!
The student: [Question regarding the sense in which Deleuze really meant that the monad might be a “reading room” (cabinet de lectures); the student asks if that might be conceived in a cinematographic manner]
Deleuze: Yes, yes, but there, you are really correct. We’ve seen that; one can say all sorts of things regarding the monad, but there even, literally, when I say that monad is a reading room, this is not exclusive. It’s from a perspective, especially given Leibniz’s pluralism, from one perspective it’s a reading room. But from another perspective, it’s decoration, it’s decorative, eh? The whole depth of the monad is tapestry; it’s decoration. From another perspective, it’s something else. So, since… since… Given all the technical aspects that Leibniz doesn’t know, in my view, you can say anything at all once there is no exterior model. So, cinema, I was saying – we discussed this. –[36] To say cinema, it’s even insufficient because cinema had to have been filmed outside… At the extreme, at the extreme, at the risk in this way of saying just anything at all, it’s a lot closer, what’s happening in the monad, to new images, to digital images that have no models, that are produced through a Combinatory. But all the metaphors are good once you take account of the “without doors or windows”. So, when I was saying “reading”, it was one case, one case, and this was addressed to Leibniz’s text in which he himself uses the word “to read.” It was meant to take his texts into account. But of course, that doesn’t exhaust the entire subject. There you are. You have to… Yes?
A woman student: I have a problem with the hem because the hem is a kind of thread, not drape, [Deleuze : Yes] so my problem is how indeed to conceive of the creation of [inaudible] and the requirement that there be hems?
Deleuze: So, is it… First, there’s a problem of facts here. In the end, you are correct, but does every hem involve thread? I have the impression that the Greek hem, such as it’s defined, such as Clérambault defines it, does not involve thread. He distinguishes two kinds of hems. He distinguished, precisely, the flat hem, very important; this is the one involving a thread, I believe, because the not flat hem, there’s the thick hem that would rather involve… [The sounds of students leaving] This is a very technical question, right, so those who want to can go. So there you are, this would involve… [Pause due to many students exiting at once, and Deleuze looks in his text] I am telling you, I have to think about this, eh? [Deleuze looks in his book]
The hem, here we are. “The hem decorated with embellishments (festonné) in Greek drapery. We notice flat hems in Greco-Roman sculpture,” that’s one thing. “But another form of hem,” wait, you’ll see, “But another form of hem is seen in Greek statuary along the final edges, in other words, transversal edges or woof edges, in the case of the péplos [Greek women’s tunic], of the clamydes [Greek men’s cloak]. This hem is characterized by a uniform embellishment of the free edge,” eh, let’s continue “by a marginal thickening of the fabric,” — in the end, I no longer am understanding anything at all — “and a marked ruffling of each particular lobe (chaque lobule particulier)”. What’s an embellishment (festonnement)? [Different answers, inaudible] … That also involves sewing?
A woman student: No, no, no… [Explanation of festonnement]
Deleuze: Ah, so it’s held by staples?
The student: No, no … [The explanation continues]
Deleuze: It’s the drape that makes it… It’s the support point of the fabric then? That would be marvelous! [Laughter] You would have an embellished hem, that’s something! That would work! [Deleuze starts laughing] Good, I feel that I have to stop now. [End of the discussion and the session] [2:35:48]

Lecture 12, 10 March 1987: The Event & Whitehead 
Part 1
Let’s get to work (On travaille). The last time, I began a kind of overview or conclusion about the transformation that Leibniz brought about in the notion of substance. If you would allow me to leave that aside, I can come back to it later especially since it was hardly begun. I feel the need to leave it aside because, as I announced to you, I need help not this time about mathematics, but about certain problems of physics. And since Isabelle Stengers is here today, and won’t be here in the coming weeks, I need to benefit from her presence, and this for two reasons: these problems concern Leibniz very closely and she knows him, and also because these problems equally concern the author who I’ve mentioned from the start of the year that I have wanted to discuss, specifically Whitehead. So you can consider that our meeting today is fully situated within our research on Leibniz, but also bears on Whitehead and his relations with Leibniz.
You know, the Greeks had a great word, in the neo-Platonic school; there was a leader of the school, and he succeeded the preceding leader, and they had a word to designate the chief successor, it was “the diadoche”, the diadoche.[2] If we imagine the Leibnizian school, Whitehead is the great diadoche, but at the same time, he renews everything. Hence my need – and why I so need to speak about this author whose dates are relatively old, 1861-1947, since he died at an advanced age. This [need] is because he belongs to these authors, to these very great philosophers who have been smothered, as if assassinated.
What does that mean, assassinated? It means that on occasion, schools of thought arise that establish… In some ways, as regards the problem of thinkers, there are two dangers: there are all the Stalins you might want, [all] the Hitlers that you might want, in relation to whom thinkers have but one choice, or two choices, or both of them together: resistance or exile. But there is something else that happens sometimes, inside of thought, which is the rise of strange doctrines that get established, that take on a veritable power there where power resides in this domain, that is in universities, and that establish a kind of tribunal, an intellectual tribunal of a special kind, and behind them, or under them, nothing more can grow. — You really should turn off the recording devices because I am speaking quite freely. [Laughter] I will never write what I am saying, so I would like to be able to say: “I never said that”. [Laughter] In this sense, I am accusing British analytic philosophy of having destroyed everything of what was rich within thought, and I accuse Wittgenstein of having assassinated Whitehead, of having reduced Russell, his master, to a kind of essayist no longer daring to discuss logic. All of that was awful and is still going on. France was spared this, but we have our analytic philosophers; yet France was spared because it went through trials that were much worse. Well, this is just to say that everything is going badly.
So, that means that nothing in the domain of thought ever dies a natural death, really. This British and American thought, before the war [WW II], was extraordinarily rich, full of richness, with authors that people now have gotten used to treating as if they were rather mentally feeble (débile), like William James. William James was an astounding genius. He was in philosophy exactly what his brother was for the novel. For anyone looking for a doctoral thesis topic, I once again tremble that there has never to my knowledge been a serious study of the two James brothers and their relations. Anyway, William Janes is something astonishing, astonishing.
And then there is Whitehead, and there was another, an Australian, the only very, very great Australian philosopher, [Samuel] Alexander. So what happened? Today, it seems to me that Whitehead is read by a handful of admirers and another handful of specialists. After all, Bergson as well… We cannot say that all of that was very serious (grave). In 1903, Whitehead was in training as a mathematician, and with [Bertrand] Russell he wrote the Principiae mathematicae, which are at the base of modern formalism and modern logic. These Principiae mathematicae that will engender Wittgenstein [sic] constitute a common, dramatic process. Ok, it matters little, I think Whitehead is British, but I get that wrong each time, and then afterward he settled in America around 1920-23. So the Principiae mathematicae with Russell was a great book of logic. The Concept of Nature, not translated into French, in 1920; Science and the Modern World, one of the rare books by Whitehead translated into French, very beautiful, very, very beautiful. There was another, but it doesn’t give any idea of what Whitehead is. Science and the Modern World is very important, very beautiful, 1926, probably unfindable.[3] His great book from 1929 [is] Process and Reality; 1933, Adventures of Ideas. [Pause]
My goal is therefore dual here: I want you to feel the grandeur of this thinking in itself, and at the same time that you grasp the link with Leibniz’s thinking, and henceforth, how literally Whitehead risks bringing to us a fundamental enlightenment about Leibniz. There is no problem with Whitehead’s knowledge of Leibniz. He is impregnated by Leibniz, and like Leibniz, he was a mathematician, a philosopher, and a physicist. Given that every philosophy tried to put something into question, what does Whitehead put into question? He puts into question the problem of what is called the categoreal scheme. The categoreal scheme is what? He tells us, generally, that the categoreal scheme of classical thought is: subject-attribute, substance-attribute.
And it is less a question of substance, which you can understand in so many ways. What is important is not to ask if things are substances. The real question is that of the attribute, but in what sense? Precisely must substance be thought as a function of an attribute, or must it be thought as a function of something else? In other words, if substance is the subject of a predicate, or of predicates, of multiple predicates, is the predicate reducible to an attribute, an attribute like “the sky is blue”? [Pause] You will tell me that it’s not a fundamentally new problem, but it’s new in a particular way, the cry of Whitehead, the cry that reverberates in all his work: no, the predicate is irreducible to any attribute. And why? Because the predicate is event. The fundamental notion is going to be that of event.
And I think that it’s for the third time in the history of philosophy that this cry reverberates, and without doubt, each time it did so in a different way: Everything is event. You will tell me, no, everything is not event since the event is the predicate. For the moment, let’s say: everything is event since the subject is an adventure that only arises from the event. [Pause] Is there a subject whose birth is not event? Everything is event. I am going to try to say it quickly. The first time, that [the cry] reverberated with the Stoics, and they were opposed to Aristotle precisely in the Aristotelian enterprise of defining substance by the attribute. And they [the Stoics] maintained what must be called a “mannerism” [Pause] since to the notion of attribute, they opposed the manner of being. Being how, how to be. The attribute is what the thing is, but the how of the thing, the manner of being, that is something else entirely. And the Stoics created the first great theory of the event. And without doubt, there was a filiation (suite) in the logics of the Middle Ages; one can locate the continuation of Stoic traditions, but one had to wait a very long time for this second cry, this kind of cry to reverberate anew: everything is event!
That is what I have tried to show from the start, namely it’s Leibniz, and there is no worse misunderstanding… I mean, I can understand it as a given, but if you don’t agree, I could very well understand that you might say, no, you’re wrong about Leibniz. But, for me, I say that the result of our earlier research is that there is no worse error about Leibniz than to understand the inclusion of the predicate in the subject as if the predicate were an attribute. And far from the predicate being an attribute, Leibniz continually denies that the predicate is an attribute. For him, the predicate is a relation, or as he says it precisely in the Metaphysical Discourse: Event, predicate or event, “or”, it cannot be stated better, as he said it in the Metaphysical Discourse. So it seems to me particularly stupid to wonder how Leibniz can take relations into account once we agree that he places the predicate in the subject. Not only does he take relations into account, he has no difficulty taking relations into account for the simple reason that, for him, what he calls predicate is the relation, it’s the event. [Pause]
We already began to see a bit how he took the relation into account, but we are leaving that aside. We can well expect that this causes him no problems, a theory of relations. It is only a problem from the perspective of a false Leibniz for whom the reader would believe that the predicate, for Leibniz, is an attribute. In that case, one could ask, in fact, how can a relation be included in the subject. But if what is included in the subject are events, and by definition, as he says it very well, events are relations (rapports) with existence. And there, we have to take seriously the word rapport. [Pause] Everything is event, at least all predicates are events. [Pause] And there, for the third time, the cry reverberates with Whitehead: Everything is event.
Everything is event, yes, including the Great Pyramid, says Whitehead. Even from the perspective of style, he’s quite Leibnizian, even the Great Pyramid is an event. You understand? What does that mean? Generally, we consider an event as a category of very special things, for example, I go out into the street and get run over by a bus. [Laughter] It’s an event. But the Great Pyramid is not an event. At most, I would say, well ok, the construction of the Great Pyramid is an event, but not the Great Pyramid itself. A chair is not an event, it’s a thing. Whitehead is unbelievable: the chair is an event, and not only the chair’s production. The Great Pyramid is an event. It’s very important to understand that this is even possible, the expression “everything is event.” And why? What is that? [Pause] In what way can the Great Pyramid be event?
You remember the examples; I jump to Leibniz, and I would like to jump perpetually from one to the other. We started off from certain determinations related to Adam. He was in the garden and he sinned, he committed a sin. To sin, to commit a sin, is obviously an event; it belongs to what everyone calls event. But the garden itself is equally an event. A flower is an event. Ok, so what? Does that mean insofar as it grows insofar as it emerges? But it never ceases to emerge, to grow. Or when it has finished growing, it never ceases to wither. It’s part of the flower itself, and at each instant of its duration, I must say it’s an event. And the chair? It’s not because it seems to be holding itself together. The chair is an event, not only its production. In what way is the Great Pyramid an event? It is so insofar as it has duration, for example, five minutes. Insofar as the pyramid lasts five minutes, it is an event. Insofar as it lasts five more minutes, it’s another event. I can connect the two events by saying: it lasts ten minutes. Every thing, says Whitehead, is a passage of nature. If you don’t complain about my accent, in English, it’s “passage of nature”. Let’s correct a little in order to get back to Leibniz: every thing is a passage of God. This is strictly the same. Every thing is a passage of nature. The Great Pyramid is an event, and is even an infinite multiplicity of events.
What does the event consist of? Literally every thing is a dance of electrons, or every thing is a variation of an electro-magnetic field. And with that, we place a foot quite carefully into physics. But the chair as a dance of electrons is an event. [Pause] For example, the event which is the life of nature – it’s the same thing as “the passage of nature”, the “life of nature” – the event that is the life of nature in the Great Pyramid, yesterday and today. [Pause] So do you sense this? Perhaps we must foresee that there is not a single Great Pyramid, but that there are perhaps two Great Pyramids. That’s what he says in the text. But we are going too quickly. For the moment, that’s how it is. Ok, there are no things, there are only events, everything is event. An event is the support for an infinite number of processes, processes of subjectivation, of individuation, of rationalization. Everything you’d like. Subjects are going to be born, rationalities, individualities are going to be traced, but all of that is in the events.
So everything is event, but that doesn’t prevent us from indeed requiring a classification of events. I suppose, for example, how must we pose the problem of freedom in terms of events? Is there a difference in nature between the events that a subject – assuming that I know what a subject is – that a subject undergoes, or that a subject brings forth? What does it mean, to cause an event (faire événement)? [Pause]
This question, as such, the distinction of events produced by subjects and events undergone has, for example, been recently posited by… [Deleuze hesitates] a philosopher, I don’t know, English or American [in fact, American] named [Donald] Davidson, in a book, Essays on Actions and Events (1980).
So, the duration of a pyramid over ten seconds is an event just as that of a particular man getting himself run over. You are events, and you aren’t only events by your birth. You are events, each of you, are events. That doesn’t mean that they are important. [Laughter] A breeze is an event. Think of the world as an event. You will tell me, what’s the point? Well, yeh, what’s the point? No point; if it pleases you, that is, if it seems to you proper to proceed that way. It’s sometimes very tough, and here I’d like, as I am overwhelming you a bit with more general considerations on philosophy, on what is philosophy, you certainly sense that there are some… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
Philosophy has a very complex relation with national characteristics, with nationalistic characteristics. It’s certainly not limited to the English, this thought, but wasn’t it necessary that it passes through the English, that it comes back to us from the English, this idea of the event? We indeed need thoughts like this that create a bit of fresh air. It’s been quite a long while since Descartes and his squabbles about the subject of the ego. The English have always lived the ego as an event. For once, it’s not very… [Pause] That doesn’t mean, yes, something essential. [Pause] A concert is taking place this evening; there.[4] With what do I write the world? Do I write the world with “I think, therefore I am”, or do I write the world with “a concert is taking place this evening”?
Let’s assume that a concert is taking place this evening, a concert. There’s an event. Let’s try to decompose it, a concert this evening. A, is “an (one)”, but “an” isn’t one with a capital O [One]; it’s the indefinite article. [In French, un] Where does it come from? Is it by chance that the Principiae mathematicae by Russell and Whitehead already created an entire formalist, formalizing theory of “an”, of the indefinite article? A concert this evening, or also, I’d say, a demonstrative pronoun, [Pause] that concert, a concert this evening, that concert of which it’s a question this evening. [Pause] The event is introduced by “a, an”; what does that mean? In his analysis, Whitehead – here, I believe I’d like to be very precise – it seems to me, he defines the event by three coordinates. This “an” refers to three coordinates.[5] [Pause] The first is every event, this concert, this concert happening there, this concert … [Interruption of the recording] [29:51]
Part 2
… And it’s this conjunction that constitutes the several in a “one”, in an “an”. Several conjugated into “an”, this is a being together, or what he calls – he has really beautiful words – a concrescence.[6] The actual occasion is a concrescence. A concrescence of what? A conjunction of what? At first glance, of other actual occasions. Any actual occasion arises in a world that already includes actual occasions. Behind the actual occasions, there’s nothing. Actual occasions are the final paths of experience. Any actual occasion refers to other actual occasions. My concert this evening refers to concerts that preceded it. These concerts that preceded it refer to an occasion that was and that is the musical work itself that is the subject of the concert. This work in its turn refers to other actual occasions that were the state of music in that period, other works, etc. There are only actual occasions. Each actual occasion conjoins, conjugates a certain number of prior, pre-existing actual occasions.
It makes of them, we’ll say, it makes of them its, says Whitehead, it makes of them its givens, data. Any actual occasion presupposes data that are preceding actual occasions. An actual occasion, therefore, is a conjugation of data, that is, pre-existing actual occasions. The emergence of a new actual occasion defines something new. The law of the event is creativity. We go from concrescence to concrescence, and creativity is the production of always new actual occasions, [Pause] such that, literally, we must say that actual occasions never cease being taken up as data – he says data, the datum, the data, the givens – actual occasions never cease being taken up as data in new actual occasions. [Pause] Each actual occasion takes, takes into itself pre-existing actual occasions. I am born: it’s an actual occasion, yes. I am not born without taking as data my father and my mother, and through my father and mother, an entire line, an entire generative line. You will say, all that, this is already consciousness. Absolutely not! In the actual occasion, there is absolutely nothing that implies consciousness. These are preh… We shall see.
There we are. I’d say that the first aspect of the event is this conjunction [Pause] of actual occasions through which an actual occasion arises in a world in which there are already actual occasions and takes them as givens, data. [Pause] Second element: henceforth, I am asking, fine, but what is an actual occasion made of? You see, my first coordinate was the actual occasion insofar as it presupposes and always refers to other actual occasions, concrescence, the appearance always of something new, creativity. The second level is, what are the elements of the actual occasions, of an actual occasion, going to be? And the answer is: the elements of the actual occasion are prehensions. An actual occasion is an aggregate of prehensions, if only because any actual occasions in its innovation prehends pre-existing actual occasions. But you indeed sense that if [Whitehead] introduced the idea of prehension, it’s in order to show clearly that no actual occasion is the passive result of actual occasions or pre-existing events. Any actual occasion insofar as it’s creative, insofar as it’s something new implies an active prehension of preceding events, of pre-existing actual occasions, exactly as this evening’s concert is a prehension of past concerts that performed the same work.
But is this only referring to past concerts that performed the same work? In other words, if I can say that the actual occasion, which has the prehension for an element, is a conjunction of prehensions, it seems to me that there are all sorts of prehensions. My concert, my concert that mutually unfolds, prehends past concerts, but not only that. An instrument actually prehends another instrument. You will tell me, yes, but no, rather, it’s the instrumentalist. What difference does that make? The instrument is an event; the instrumentalist is an event. I don’t know if I am able to distinguish them for the moment. “The violin complained, the piano answered it.” The violin complained, the piano answered it, two prehensions, one prehends the other. You remember? This is…? Vinteuil’s music in Remembrance of Things Past, and I can say this about any concert at all.[7] [Pause] An orchestration, what is this if not a distribution of prehensions? I assign the instrument [Pause] that is going to take charge of a particular actual occasion, that is going to operate a particular prehension. And then, my concert is prehended by the public; but the instrumentalists themselves prehend the public. Here we have a system of inter-prehensions going to infinity, that is, of reciprocal prehensions. [Pause]
Fine, but what is a prehension composed of? Ok, it’s the element of the actual occasion, but following what little I have said, there are several aspects of the prehension. It’s not in the same way that the piano prehends the violin and that the orchestra leader prehends the orchestra and the spectator prehends the work. So what are these prehensions? Of what is a prehension composed? Are there elements of the prehension, and how many, and which ones? [Pause]
And finally, the third coordinate, [Pause] what a strange world all this is. But it’s a world that has no subsistence. I mean that this is the moment, now or never, to say that all things flow, they flow, they flow, they pass, they flow. It’s everywhere, everywhere. It’s a dance of electrons. Everywhere it’s electromagnetic variations, as much for sounds as for sight. All that, it’s … we shall see, all that; it’s a system of vibrations.
A system of vibrations, fine, but what remains? All that is quite lovely. By what right can I say, ah, but it’s the Great Pyramid! But for the moment, I don’t even have the right to say that it’s the Great Pyramid. Ah, look! It’s the Great Pyramid, that is, I get up, I go out, and I say, look! It’s the little phrase, [Pause] ah, I recognize Mozart’s little phrase; ah, there’s the little phrase. But, how am I going to say something like that? What is there in the actual occasion that allows me to say that? Nothing! The actual occasion is a variation of field, in the name of what, I say? I can say the passage of nature in the Great Pyramid, fine, but I say it once and that passes. But myself, I am not satisfied with saying that. The next day, look, it’s still there, the Great Pyramid, and moreover, I’d be astounded if it weren’t there. Now, that would be an event, if it were no longer there. That would be an actual occasion.
Fine, there’s more. This note, this particular note, or else this group of notes, Vinteuil’s little phrase, such as it’s decomposed, isn’t it a set of five notes? [The reference is to the fictional musician in Proust’s Swann’s Way] But, a single note, a si, the si by [Alban] Berg. Ah, there’s Berg’s si, there it is! Ah, there’s the cry! There’s Wozzeck’s cry ! Ten times, a hundred times, I suppose, I’ve been to the concert. What makes me say, ah, this is Wozzeck’s cry? What makes me say, it’s a si? It’s that note! So, literally, every, as a well-known philosopher said, yes, all that, everything flows, everything changes.[8]
Fine; is this a Leibnizian problem? We have the time to recall the extent to which it’s a Leibnizian problem. … The Monadology — I’ve lost it. It’s so small, the Monadology. [Laughter] Ah, then I’ve also lost the reference… Ah, no. – Paragraph 71. [We must] attach great importance to the texts. Paragraph 71. “Some people who have misunderstood my ideas” – so they’ve understood nothing! — “Some people who have misunderstood my ideas have thought me to have implied that every soul has a mass or a portion of matter which is its own and is assigned to it forever”. This is a lot; it was thought that, for Leibniz, each soul had a body. [Pause] He says, not at all. “All bodies are in a perpetual state of flux, with parts constantly coming into them and going out.”[9]
If you will, molecules never stop changing; molecules never stop changing, but I am saying that, in a certain way, it’s the same. Understand, all that seems very, very banal, but think about it. I am not saying that it’s the same in the sense of a generality. I’m not saying, ah, it’s a cow because it has horns. But I am saying it’s the same in the smallest details. It’s a question of tint, of a tint, of a color. That particular green, that green, by that painter; ah, I say, ah yes, it’s his green, it’s his famous green, a particular nuance placed in its very individuality, a particular set of notes that returns from concert to concert. You’ll tell me, with variations; yes, with occasional variations, literally. [Pause]
But what is that? Leibniz says, well, everything changes. Here as well, on the level of actual occasion, Whitehead says, well, everything changes. Electrons that enter molecules that enter into the pyramid’s composition for ten minutes, well, these are not the same as the ones that enter into the pyramid’s composition ten minutes later. So, it’s true, as they say, the most vulgar Heraclitus, the traditional Heraclitus, everything flows, we don’t bathe twice in the same river, all that, this is what Leibniz returns to in another text that says the same thing as the one I’ve just quoted, in the New Essays: “The body is not the same beyond one moment. It’s only equivalent.” The body is not the same beyond one moment. It’s only equivalent. “It’s like a river that always is renewing its water.” And yet, you say, and this is the Garonne; look, it’s the Garonne. What’s important is not that the river always changes its water. You told yourself, my God, it’s the Garonne, a proper name, not at all a generality. You don’t say, it’s a river; you say, it’s the Garonne, as you’d say, good morning, Pierre. But when you say, good morning, Pierre, the molecules to which you say good morning, they have completely changed! [Laughter] There is not one [molecule] that subsists. Well, we’d have to see. If you haven’t seen him for two years, there’s not a molecule that subsists. [Laughter] And you tell him, good morning, Pierre! This is crazy, in the moment. There is no Pierre, there’s… It’s not at all the same electromagnetic field. All that is… We mustn’t say good morning, Pierre, to this point; we must not do so.
[Leibniz] adds that, “It’s like a river that always changes its water or like Theseus’s ship that’s always being repaired.” Theseus’s ship means having a hole that’s always being repaired, Theseus’s ship that’s always being repaired. Our bodies are Theseus’s ship that’s always being repaired, that is, but transfusion is our normal order. We never cease being transfused. [Pause] I am letting you reflect on this painful truth, [Laughter] this is the moment. And yet I say, it’s this note, ah, I know it, not even a set; it’s the famous si from Berg, or it’s the three or five little notes from Vinteuil’s little phrase.
So there we have the third coordinate. It’s what Whitehead calls eternal objects. Sense that this is rather strange because these eternal objects are at the same time… He himself compares them to the Platonic Idea; they are at the same time quite close to Plato. But, but, but, with this essential difference: it’s that these are not eternal ideas since at least Berg’s si did not pre-exist Berg. It’s Berg that caused it to exist, at the moment of creativity. But once he created it, Berg’s si, it’s embodied, it’s embodied in a concert, at a moment, and then it disappears. But we can still wait ten years should Wozzeck no longer be performed, twenty years, forty years, and the eternal object, that si, if I dare say, that si, will redescend, will be incarnate at the first actual occasion, that is, in the actual occasion.
The eternal object, Whitehead tells us, eternal objects, what are these? How do we define them? These are potentials, Whitehead tells us. You see the difference from the actual occasion. These are potentials. The actual occasion was defined by the concrescence. The eternal object is not a concrescence; it’s an ingression. It creates ingression in the actual occasion. And no doubt, it’s not the deepest of the eternal object, but it’s thanks to it that I can recognize something, that is, that I can identify. It’s the only identical with itself; the eternal object, is the identical with itself. It’s this note si. It’s not at all a generality. It’s this note si such as it’s identical to itself through all the concerts. [Pause] Without it, I wouldn’t recognize anything in the world. If I can identify the passage… Rather, [The Web Deleuze transcript recommences here] if I can identify the Great Pyramid through two passages of nature, by saying: it’s the same pyramid, it’s the Great Pyramid, it’s uniquely thanks to an eternal object.
There’s what I wanted to say in order to situate this philosophy. I’d just like, if I’d been able to, to have you sense what this philosophy contains that’s at once very familiar and very strange for us. Philosophy should create such modes of thought. Besides, that is the title of one of Whitehead’s books, Modes of Thought. If I summarize, I see three coordinates: the actual occasions defined by conjunctions, prehensions, and eternal objects. To the actual occasion correspond the concepts of conjunction, concrescence, and creativity; to prehensions correspond all the elements that we’ve not yet seen from prehension, all the components of prehension; to eternal objects correspond the different types of eternal objects. For example, you should already sense that there are sensible eternal objects and there are conceptual eternal objects … No, that’s bad, what I just said… There are eternal objects that refer to sensible qualities, and others that refer to scientific concepts.
So where is our problem? All that was relatively simple, but we have three problems, and it’s on these points that I so need Isabelle. First problem: we started off from conjunctions, that is, from actual occasions, we already gave ourselves events and a world of events. Can we undertake the genesis of the event? How do we arrive at conjunctions? Are conjunctions just given like that? No. For it doesn’t go without saying that there are conjunctions in the world. From where do we get the explanation that there are conjunctions in the world? For me, I don’t know what Isabelle will say, this is the fundamental problem of Whitehead’s philosophy. If that problem is resolved, all the rest unfolds, not as a given, but all the rest unfolds rather well. That is really the most difficult problem, where Whitehead is both a physicist and mathematician. He needs there an entire mode of physico-mathematics to take account of the formation of conjunctions, that is, of the formation of actual occasions. Why? Consider this: because we start from a random distribution, a type like the random distribution of electrons, or a variation of an electro-magnetic field. How do conjunctions form in such a world? If we don’t have a precise answer to that, well then, we will have failed. We need a precise answer to that question.
The second question will be: what is a prehension made of? What are the elements of a prehension? And if it’s true that the actual occasion is a conjunction, we must say in Whitehead’s vocabulary, I forgot to indicate this, that an aggregate of prehensions is a nexus, [Pause] a nexus. So, the second problem, it’s the components of prehensions. Third problem: the modes of eternal objects.
The most difficult for me is this initial genesis. How do we arrive at conjunctions, why are there conjunctions? Is there a reason for conjunctions, a reason that can only be mathematical and physical? I would like Isabelle’s thoughts. But that doesn’t keep everything from being fine. I’d already like Isabelle’s opinion on all that, on, … Where is she? [Pause] Ahhh! What do you think? What is… How do you see all this?
Isabelle Stengers: [8 minutes, comments barely audible; cf. note for partial summary][10]
Deleuze: That’s very interesting. That’s very interesting because immediately, you insert something that interests me greatly because… It’s not at all a question – I assume that everyone here understands this – it’s not at all a question of arguing. What strikes me is that what seems to interest Whitehead – the fundamental aspect of all great thinkers; they are rich – what seems to interest Isabelle Stengers in Whitehead is not what interests me most, and what interests me the most is not what interests her. But, once we’ve established that it’s not about who is right or who is wrong, I believe that these are good conditions so that just as she could ask me some questions, and I would answer as precisely as I can, it’s my turn to ask Isabelle questions because I am sure she is able to answer, without at all giving up her viewpoint. She told us this quite exactly: it is true that at the start of his work, for example in the Concept of Nature, Whitehead still thought it possible to create a genesis of the actual occasion, that is, a genesis of conjunctions. And OK, she tells me, at that moment, he thought only a mathematical physics can give us the key to this genesis. And then she says, he might have sensed that, at that moment, if he made a genesis of conjunctions, as any conjunction, an idea to which he was greatly attached, since every conjunction is new, it is in fact innovative (nouveauté), in its essence it is innovation; there is no actual occasion that would not be new. It [the conjunction] is not the effect of preceding actual occasions, there is no determinism. An actual occasion is active, it is prehension, that is, prehending – well, since an actual occasion can not be deducted from anything other than itself, Isabelle thinks that he would have renounced, or at least have been less interested in its genesis in order to take the problem to a level of a finality and of a very particular conception of God which, ultimately, operates at the level of actual occasions.
As for me, but we will see, I think that the genesis of conjunctions, or the genesis of actual occasions, the physico-mathematical genesis, is something that Whitehead will not renounce, provided that this genesis fully respects the requirement that Isabelle signals, specifically that it must not be a genesis such that the actual occasion would derive, flow or result from its genetic components. It must be a genesis that takes account of this, that the only law of the actual occasion is always to be an innovation in relation to its components. And it is precisely this genesis of innovation that is essential, genesis of innovation as such, that is, that implies no reduction of the new to the former. It is this very genesis that Whitehead, because he knows so much math and physics, is going to create in conditions that, in fact, make of him and his philosophy one of the rare philosophies – in my view, with Bergson’s – to have operated a fundamental linkage with modern science.
So, it means that I’d like to proceed almost through question by asking Isabelle each time, does that work, or does it not? For he starts from something, he gives himself something. We are therefore in my first problem, genesis, the genesis of occasions, or the genesis of conjunctions. A conjunction is something new, of the type: there’s a concert this evening. It’s an innovation, and you won’t engender it, that is, it is not a result. It is not the effect of a cause. A genesis is not causal. So then, what is it? Where does he start from? Well, he starts – and it’s as if I am adding a question mark to all my sentences for Isabelle. He starts from, you will have to excuse my accent, the “many,” [Pause; Deleuze asks around him about the pronunciation] I’ll never be able to pronounce it. I say it in English because… I would say he starts from the multiple, but a pure and aleatory multiplicity. [Interruption in the recording] [1:16:39] [Text from WebDeleuze] He gives it a name in Process and Reality, it’s the pure state of disjunctive diversity.
Part 3
[Return to the recording] He gives himself any disjunctive diversity whatsoever (une diversité disjunctive quelconque). The word disjunctive is very important since he starts from the opposite of conjunction. Disjunctive diversity, what is it? I don’t know. I don’t know. We’ll see rather because what matters is that at each of these steps, there is a kind of adjustment with Leibniz that is astounding, such that all of this is a prodigious reading of Leibniz, at the same time that it then brings forth a new Leibniz for us. It’s a new actual occasion. Astounding. It comes in this way from “many”, a random multiplicity defined by the disjunctive diversity. Isabelle, do you grant me that?
Stengers: Of course.
Second point, that is going to be the first step of the genesis. It will show us that, starting with this step of disjunctive diversity, something absolutely new is produced, the first step of innovation, sketched in this disjunctive diversity, is sketched in the “many”, of infinite, limitless series, which tend toward no limit. Infinite, limitless series. It’s like the step, this first moment, it’s infinite divisibility. The disjunctive diversity undergoes –, we will see how and why, there are many questions in what I am saying, I am setting out a map – [it] undergoes a process of infinite divisibility that organizes infinite, limitless series in the “many”. [Pause]
So at this stage, a question: what are these limitless series, unlimited series, infinite series without limits? I will begin to answer by saying – I am going to lay out my entire schema, and then I’d like for Isabelle to re-intervene — that this first step rests on an analysis of vibration. Ultimately, at the basis of the event, there are vibrations. At the basis of actual events, there are vibrations. The first step was the “many”, any old vibrations, random vibrations. [Pause]
For those who know Bergson, perhaps you recall the splendid ending of Matter and Memory: the basis of matter is vibration, and vibrations of vibration. The correspondence of Whitehead-Bergson is revealed at all sorts of levels, these philosophers are very close. Everything is vibration at this level. But why does vibration already produce this beginning of the order? It’s because every vibration has sub-multiples and extends on these sub-multiples. The property of vibration is to extend on these sub-multiples. The sub-multiples of a vibration — in this I am not really speaking scientifically, it’s just so you can locate things in your head — that has a famous name in all domains, and these are harmonics. In this I don’t need to underscore the wink at Leibniz. All this is important for your future. These are harmonics. A color is a vibration, a sound is a vibration. [Pause] As such, every sound has harmonics, every color has harmonics.
So, my hypothesis is this: it is vibration that emerges in the “many,” but how does it emerge, there where we are pushed back… We have to answer, and I beg you please not to abandon me if I don’t answer everything, or else everything will collapse, and so fine, everything collapses. If everything collapses, we will say: we were wrong, Whitehead isn’t a great philosopher. Yet obviously Whitehead is a great philosopher, one of genius, so it has to work. There’s no choice. It has to, it has to, it has to.  So ok, my vibration is formed in the “many”, and from that moment, disjunctive diversity starts to be organized into an infinite, limitless series. We must assume that each vibration has sub-multiples, has harmonics into infinity, within the pure cosmos. The cosmos was the “many”, that is, chaos. A chaos. It was the chaos cosmos.
Third step: We’re not going far with these infinite vibratory series. Infinite vibratory series. Yes! But we have seen that vibrations are already a principle of individuation. Every vibration has an infinity of sub-multiples. This is not the same. What our senses will distinguish as a sound and a color are very different vibrations, with very different harmonies, in other words, a vibration infinitely divisible into sub-multiples that are themselves vibratory. Every infinitely divisible vibration has certain intrinsic characteristics. [Pause] These intrinsic characteristics either concern the nature of the envisaged vibration, or even – extrinsic characteristics – its relations with other vibrations. I would say that a vibration that comes after, because we’re not yet at the sensory organs, but this is out of commodity — a sound vibration has characteristics of duration, height, intensity, timbre. Color has characteristics, intrinsic and extrinsic, that are tint, saturation, value, the three great dimensions of color, of what color will be, but it’s open, I can always find a new one. For a long time, these three variables of color were noted: tint, saturation, and value. Since the end of the nineteenth century, we tend more and more to add to these the extension (l’étendue) of color to then define a very interesting new variable that also depends on extension and value, and that is called the weight of color. You indeed see, it’s for both; I easily conceive of a sound system that adds other variables to duration, height, intensity and timbre.
But what are these characteristics? Well, these characteristics, you recall them, vibration enters into infinite, limitless series; these are characteristics, or rather as Whitehead says, and who weighs his words carefully, the quantities, the quantitative expressions capable of measuring them, of measuring these characteristics; the quantitative expressions able to measure these characteristics enter into series – this is very important, [this] progress — enter into series that converge toward limits. The vibratory series are not convergent and have no limits. It’s the first stage of genesis.
Second stage of genesis: the series of intrinsic and extrinsic characteristics converge towards limits. This time we have an idea of converging series. The timbers are going to form a converging series; the intensities are going to form a convergent series; the heights are going to form a convergent series, etc. etc. The tints are going to form a convergent series. It’s beautiful. That appears to me a thing of very great beauty. It’s a genesis of the most… and it’s also so full of science, it’s a very modern way, a very modern mode of science, in fact, but yet it’s very simple.
So, in the third stage, I have… The first stage, [there’s] the “many” or the disjunctive diversity; second stage, [there’s] the organization of infinite, limitless series with the vibrations and the sub-multiples of vibrations; third stage, formation of convergent series toward limits. [Pause] Fourth stage, everything is ready: the actual occasion is the conjunction. The conjunction comes after the convergence. The conjunction is a meeting of two convergent series, at least. You have engendered the actual occasion, and that does not prevent the actual occasion, which is a conjunction, from being radically new in relation to the genetic series that engender it, in relation to two convergent series, at least. It [the conjunction] is completely new.
Hence, fifth [stage] then, what is the actual occasion made of, once we say that we must not confuse the elements of the actual occasion and the conditions of the actual occasion? I would say the requisites of the actual occasion. The requisites of the actual occasion are: the disjunctive diversity, the infinite, limitless vibratory series, the convergent series. These are the successive requisites of the actual occasion, that is, of the conjunction.
So you have four terms: 1) the many, 2) the infinite, limitless series, 3) the convergence of series, that is, these are evidently not the same series that become convergent, these are new series; 4) the conjunction of series which yield the actual occasion; 5) what are the elements to be, and not the requisites, the elements of the actual occasion, that is, what is an actual occasion made of? Answer: it is made of prehensions. But what is a prehension made of, what are the elements of the prehension, what are the component elements and not the requisite conditions?
So, what is important to me? I would like for you to understand this before I ask Isabelle. Is this very clear as a schema? It has to be very, very clear. What is important to me is not at all that we discuss this later; we have to do it on the level of convergent series, non-convergent series, all that.  Realize that this refers to all kinds of things in math and in physics, but that really, it corresponds to each person’s taste, you don’t strictly need to know anything to understand, or at least to feel it. As for “feeling” as Whitehead says, you can sense and even see this world being formed. The “many” is a kind of soup, it’s the great soup, it’s what the cosmologists call “the pre-biotic soup,” the disjointed members, what Empedocles already called the membrae disjunctae. That links so well with everything that is important in philosophy. It’s the river that carries along the membrae disjunctae, the scattered members, an arm, then a nose, it’s chaos. But we must assume that it’s not a nose, it’s an electron of a nose. [Laughter] So that in this soup, exactly as if you stirred a fork through the purée are traced – but all that is really so much Leibniz, we shall see – are traced limitless series without convergence. It’s so close to Leibniz.
And then each one of these limitless series without convergence has a characteristic, and the characteristics of series enter themselves into convergent series. You see? And fourth, when they have entered into convergent series, then conjunctions are produced, like lumps in your soup, and these are actual occasions precipitated by a lump; wow! An occasion, and you’ll have hardly started chewing on your lump when you will notice that it’s composed of prehensions. Fine, so then, is this clear, if not I will start it all over again! [Laughter] Isabelle says ok on “the many”.
I am insisting on this; in my view, such a genesis escapes the danger indicated by Isabelle, because the actual occasion is not at all presented as a passive result. Each time there is activity and retro-activity. The convergent series react on infinite series without convergence; the conjunctions react on the convergent series, etc. At each level, there is emergence of a new type of activity. The series is an activity, the convergence of series is another activity, the conjunction another activity, etc… So there, she granted me the stage of “the many” or of the disjunctive diversity. We pass on to the second stage.
But, I am asking her here, in physics – after all, it seems to me that you wrote a book very close to… I don’t know at all if you knew of Whitehead at that point. Isabelle, when you wrote “States and Process”, did you already know Whitehead? Yes! It’s a book with many, many encounters with…[11] My question is very simple. We don’t know what happened following the answer Isabelle gave me, so we’ll pull back, but I am just saying, we don’t know very well what happened in the disjunctive diversity, but we grant ourselves vibrations. There is the formation of vibrations. Where do they come from, vibrations? Once again, I’ll have to say it, but I feel rather sure of myself to say where vibrations come from. On this point, I need Isabelle less. Can I say, well indeed yes, these vibration form infinite series that converge toward no limit, and it’s the case of a vibration in relation to its harmonics, assuming an infinity of harmonics within chaos? Can I say that, or else is it a stupid proposition from a physics perspective?
Stengers: [Comments still inaudible]
Deleuze: You said something quite marvelous then, you see, because I am insisting on the following point: it’s a kind of philosophy that is completely in connection with modern science. This is obviously stupid; I refer again to Bergson’s example, because to say that Bergson, right, made a metaphysics from duration and liquidates science; one has to be profoundly weak mentally (débile), that he wasn’t interested in science, one has to suffer from a very, very deep mental weakness to say something like that. Bergson’s idea – you’re going to see why I am invoking Bergson, it’s quite simple — is that modern science gives us and brings us a new conception of time, scientific time. Modern scientific time which begins in physics around the sixteenth century can be defined scientifically, I say again scientifically, as follows: it’s the consideration of time at any instant at all (à un instant quelconqu). Why is this modern? Because ancient science defined time as a function of privileged moments. Bergson’s idea is very simple, and very beautiful: what did Galileo do, what did Galileo do? Based on that, what did Bergson try to do? He said that ancient metaphysics was the correlate to ancient science.
— [Noise of chairs, interruption] Aie, aie, aie, aie, aie, aie, aie… So, those who want to leave, you just leave, but do so quickly. [Pause] Ah, this is hard, eh? It’s hard for everybody, but it’s hard for me as well. [Pause] No, but please, really, leave! I have no problem with it at all. We’ll stop for five minutes so that those who want to leave do so, but don’t leave one by one… Leave in groups at least. [Pause] No, really, this is too much… I can’t work in these conditions… Eh, no, that’s enough! [Pause] So… [Deleuze’s voice becomes indistinct as he talks softly to the students close by him] —
Fine, I was saying, Bergson tells us exactly: what you call metaphysics, is ancient metaphysics, but to what extent? — [Interruption, a student enters from another door] Ah, he has a key? There’s no lock?… Ah, no, this is dangerous because we wouldn’t be able to exit… Right, if we manage to get it shut! – So, fine, [Bergson] says: ancient metaphysics, what does that mean? But it was perfectly adapted to ancient science, and inversely ancient science was absolutely adapted to its metaphysics. Physics, metaphysics, we must retain these excellent terms. Aristotle created the physics of movement, and the metaphysics that corresponds to this physics of movement and the physics of movement corresponds to Aristotle’s metaphysics.
Today there is a group (série) of cretins who have thought, because science had evolved, it could do without metaphysics. Bergson said that this is completely idiotic; this proposition has no sense at all. Simply, science has, in fact, sufficiently evolved – not at all that Aristotle is ancient, that has no sense – one must, including and thanks to Aristotle, take up metaphysics again from zero. One must make metaphysics into the correlate for modern science, exactly as modern science is the correlate of a potential metaphysics that we have not yet been able to create. What is the metaphysics that can correspond to a scientific consideration of time taken as any instant at all? Bergson said: it’s mine. Whether he’s right or wrong matters little. He meant that it’s a metaphysics of duration, and no longer of eternity. You notice the common theme with Whitehead. What is metaphysics for Whitehead that corresponds to modern science? It would be a metaphysics of creativity.  It will be a metaphysics of the new, “innovation”, [Deleuze attempts to pronounce the English several times], the new, the something new.
So, why did I go into all that?… Ah yes! It’s marvelous what Isabelle just said. I say: is it possible to conceive of a vibration that extends into the infinity of harmonics, that is, into an infinity of sub-multiples? She answered, obviously yes; but that would not interest a physicist. Notice the notion of “interest”: that would not interest a physicist because the whole operation of science will be to find the average. A researcher would be solely interested in the average, and it’s in this way that a scholar is a scholar, agreed. He’s not at all wrong from his viewpoint. In fact, he’ll only be interested in the average. Or in the case of acoustics, a researcher would be interested only in a number of finite, and close, harmonics. This is a researcher’s job. The metaphysics that corresponds to this science is not a reflection on this science; it must say metaphysically what the science says scientifically, that is, it must say with concepts what science says with functions. Metaphysics is prodigiously interested in not finding the average, and to constitute a series which, in fact, will have no physical interest, but will have considerable metaphysical interest, an infinite series without convergence constituted by vibration and the infinity of its sub-multiples, the infinity of its harmonics.
So, on that note, a second point, and here, it gets more complicated, it’s more technical. It is possible, in fact, that I understood poorly Whitehead’s thesis, and that bothers me. First, it’s in English, not translated obviously, and you have already guessed that my relationship with English was painful. But for those who know English and for whom this is of interest, it’s in Concept of Nature, it’s the marvelous chapter 4. I am translating little bits for you: “The character of the event” — for the moment, the event is thus an infinite, not convergent sequence (suite) without limits; he has nothing else at this point in the chapter – “can be defined by the quantitative expressions expressing relations between various quantities intrinsic to the event itself” — i.e. in the series, diverse intrinsic quantities, it seems to me, of the kind I had told you about, duration, height, intensity — “or between such quantities and other quantities intrinsic to other events” — that is, in other vibrations–  “In the case of events that have considerable spatio-temporal extension, this set of quantitative expressions is highly complex. If e be an event, let us denote by q(e) the set of quantitative expression defining its character including its connections with the rest of nature.”[12] So, you see that e designates the infinite vibratory series extending to the sub-multiples, and that q(e) designates one of the characteristics of the series. It yields as a schema of two series e1, e2, e3, …, en, en+1, …, that’s the vibratory series, and q(e1), q(e2), q(e3), …, q(en), q(en+1), …. , that’s the series of characteristics. “If Q1 be a quantitative measurement found in q(e1), and Q2 the homologue to Q1 to be found in q(e2), and Q3 the homologue to Q1 and Q2 to be found in q(e3), and so on, then the series Q1, Q2, Q3, …, Qn, Qn+1, …, though it has no last term.” So it has in common with the preceding vibratory series, it has in common not to have a final term, it is indeed infinite… “though it has no last term, it does in general converge” – the series of the Qs – “it converges to a definite limit” (p. 45). There you are.
So obviously my agony is: Is my commentary correct, since he, Whitehead, gives no examples. Is my commentary correct? I therefore need Isabelle. The essential point is this birth of the convergent series, convergent toward a limit. What do you think?
Isabelle Stengers: [Response generally inaudible; she comments (for about a minute) on the different senses of mathematical series and on Whitehead’s reflection on convergent series]
Deleuze: At that point, and it’s only at that stage, that he’s a mathematician-physicist.
Stengers: Yes.
Deleuze: So, that matters to me greatly since I believe in the possibility of relays, in a metaphysical relay in science, once we’ve said that the two disciplines are extremely different. But that does not prevent there being relays in the same work if there is the complementarity that I indicated following Bergson, following Whitehead, if there is this complementarity between metaphysics and science, and that this complementarity has absolutely not gone stale; it’s just that people have absolutely understood nothing, it seems to me, and it means we do not yet have metaphysics from our science, but that doesn’t prevent, despite their different nature, metaphysics-science, there being relays, whereas in the same author, if he has the necessary competence, and just a bit of metaphysics, there would be a relay through science, etc.
What Isabelle said there is very important for me. It’s that, in fact, as long as I stay at the infinite series of harmonics, well then, science cannot use that and feels no need to use any of that. But already, it will cause what you called an operative schema to pass; it will cause it to pass as a function. You had another term; you said “construction”, right?
Stengers: Yes.
Deleuze: A construction; let’s use function, I prefer that word, and this will be Fourier’s Law. For those who know this a bit, what in fact you just referred to, Fourier’s Law which concerns precisely the basis of vibratory movements, is typically the means by which science is going to use that. And then, [there’s] a new stage, the definition and determination of series converging toward limits. So there, this is a scientific act; it’s a scientific act that works as relay and then, immediately, — in fact, that helps me understand something – Whitehead, to the extent that he created a philosophy book, doesn’t even give any examples. I’m the one taking the risk of examples, linked to sounds and color, etc. [Whitehead] uniquely talks about characeristics; he speaks of intrinsic characteristics whose measure tends toward – this isn’t the intrinsic characteristic, right, that tends toward a limit. And the instrinsic characteristic is capable of and susceptible to a measure, and it’s the measure of the intrinsic characteristic that tends toward limits, and at that point, you have convergent series, from that point on, you have them, everything is ready. I am not at all saying that you have conjunctions because conjunctions do not result from all that, but everything is prepared for the emergence of conjunctions. You understand? Such that we are referred all the way back to the start, if you still are up for it. The very beginning, what is that? Well, we were in our soup, and we suddenly say, ah well yes, there are even non-convergent series, these infinite non-convergent series that are formed.
So, just grant me… I’m looking to have a little snack. — Thanks to Isabelle, we can tell ourselves, yes, we see how one passes, we see… One would have to support this scientifically, but that’s not our job; she [Isabelle] could do it, but we wouldn’t glean very much from the metaphysical perspective. We can therefore pass the series without convergence to the convergent series. What’s difficult is how the series are formed in the primitive soup, in the primitive disorder. How is that possible? [Pause] Well, it’s this point that I’d like to… Are you still able?
Stengers: [Inaudible answer]
Deleuze: I am being a bit hypocritical here… By commenting, I’d like to develop this point to see how you react.
Accept that we return to Leibniz. Let’s forget everything, let’s temporarily forget everything that we just saw for there are texts then – but perhaps there wouldn’t have been everything that we just said, we wouldn’t have seen them, we would have passed beside them since they are not very numerous, but they are very, very profound, very powerful, Leibniz’s texts. We perhaps wouldn’t have passed them by due to [Michel] Serres because Serres certainly noticed them for reasons that we will see. Besides, if they interest him so much, these texts by Leibniz, it’s because these are texts that allude to a primordial chaos, that is, a state of pure multiplicity that corresponds completely to the “many”, disjunctive diversity, and that presents itself as purely aleatory successions (suites). For example, in the New Essays, book 4, chapter 2, paragraph 14, [Leibniz] evokes a fistful of printer’s letters thrown down haphazardly. It’s a pure disjunctive multiplicity. In fact, it would be astounding were these to create a sentence, result in a sentence. He gives other examples. The fistful of tossed letters, and then he gives another example that would matter greatly to us since he says textually – go see the text because he wanted [to say] that, but me too – “We don’t know how primary numbers are hidden in pleats,” in other word, there’s no law of primary numbers. They are easy to recognize; we can recognize them, but what law do they obey? We might say, an aleatory distribution, as it were. In any case, for our immediate pleasure, we don’t know what the law of primary numbers is, we don’t know. It’s an aleatory distribution, exactly as if God tossed a fistful of numbers, and then for those that fall face up, he had said, these are primary numbers.
And then there’s yet another example: A thousand cannonballs, a thousand separate cannonballs. He says that they’re very tiring to count, and when one gets to the thousandth one… Here, just like that he gives as example of disjunctive diversity a thousand cannonballs strolling around. He says they’re tiring to count, and then when one has counted them, you don’t know if you’ve made a miscount, even by one, so you would nonetheless have to start the count over, such that the artillery men – admire here, the birth of series – the artillery men proceed to create groupings. They proceed to put them into figures, for example, of ten. They will form either lovely pyramids of cannonballs, or delightful squares, or rectangles, whatever you’d like. They place them into figures… [Interruption of the recording] [2:03:28]
Part 4
… And it’s not a convergent series; it converges onto nothing. It’s exactly like my second state, an infinite series that converges on no limit. I am making my little groupings of ten; it’s a bit what Leibniz constantly calls “creating a table”. This is the role of the wearhouseman (magasinier); all accountancy works this way. And then, I have to count one-two-three-four-five-six-seven-eight-nine-ten in order to have my thousand cannonballs. And I haven’t counted; I’m sure of myself. See the prodigious step! But we are not there yet; we haven’t invented the art of the warehouseman. We’re slogging around on our chaotic battlefield with a thousand cannonballs; we tell ourselves, oo là là, how many cannonballs are there? I don’t know how many of them there are. And so then, with my letters that I use like that…
All that isn’t right. And what is that for Leibniz? I am saying the texts are rare. Yes and no, because at the same time, he is so sure of himself, for that state, this state of the “many”, of disjunctive diversity, certainly, [this state] is in things. It’s also in our poor heads, [Laughter] the heads that Leibniz is the first philosopher to have assigned the state of our minds in this form, our poor heads in chaos. And that is not at all Cartesian. For Descartes, “I’m wrong, I’m wrong” – he desires this – “I’m wrong, and I am wronged.” He is suspicious, he is suspicious. He is wronged all the stime. There’s even a God who has the time to wrong him; in the end, this is pure paranoia. [Laughter] Whereas with Leibniz, it’s confusional delirium. [Laughter] It’s, “what’s going on in my head? Ah, what confusion! And what are all these dancing electrons? I can’t form an idea; there’s an idea leak.” This is otherwise nobler than paranoia since… Well, really, no, one could admire it. This is to tell you, when you admire a philosopher, and when one makes one’s great philosophical choices, one has to say that this commits you, in your soul, in your heart, and even in your reason, in your ailments and in your health. You choose a philosophy with your ailments as well.
So, what is Leibniz? This really is fog in one’s head. It’s what I was telling you: it’s the folds, it’s haze. This is not at all Cartesian, not at all. This is not at all the head of the error; it’s the head of the indeterminable for [Leibniz]. How am I going to be able to distinguish? This is not, “how am I going to be able to have a distinct idea,” but “how am I going to be able to distinguish something in all this slush? And what are these, what are all these states?” I was saying at the last session, these are semi-hallucinatory states. Is this a dream? Is this reality? What is this haze through which I am seeing things? And what are the examples that Leibniz constantly evokes? The background noise of the sea, this is very well chosen. In his head, he perpetually has a sea noise, [Pause] or even uproar (rumeur), uproar, a kind of… And in what way are these states realized in the purest state? Dizziness (étourdissement). There, suddenly, this is in texts a thousand times, appearing a thousand times in Leibniz, dizziness, sleep, and death. For, what is death? Do you recall? It’s when the body folds back in all its parts; death lodges itself in the folds of ashes, and death is the return to the uproar, to dizziness. There is no difference of nature between death and dizziness. [Pause] Perpetually, the veil, the fog, the dust… Dust, what is there as a more beautiful aleatory distribution [than] dust?
So, that’s a point that Serres made very, very well, and I believe that suits him, suits his own work as much as it can suit what I’d like to do myself. Besides, he wrote a book called – it’s one of Serres’s books – called Genesis and, as he said, should have been called Noise, and there’s a tiny chapter on “noise”, he looked into “noise”, and what is noise? He maintains – but here, one must be cautious because… I don’t know if it’s, if it’s… well, no, maybe not really, I lost it… no matter – You’ll see there, the little chapter on noise. It’s very interesting because he connects noise to the background noise of the sea. And here we see ourselves facing the problem, one that Serres considered entirely in his books, to wit, starting from noise, starting from the background noise, starting from a world of parasites, finally, where everything is parasite – another book by [Serres] on the parasite – how does we create the genesis of a piece of information? Oh, no, we are not going to talk about information because that doesn’t really interest us much, but the genesis of the actual occasion, I could say that the actual occasion, fine, good, that’s what a piece of information is, the actual occasion. It’s a piece of information, fine, it’s a genesis.
So you see? The question is… I’d say as well that in Leibnizian terms, there’s a marvelous definition of chaos to be drawn from Leibniz. It’s a mixture; it’s the mixed aggregate of incompossibles. It’s the aggregate of all the possibles; it’s the aggregate of all the possibles including the incompossibles. That’s what chaos is. You remember? And this is before the creation of the world, all that, since God only creates the world by choosing a world, a world in which all the elements are compossible and while excluding all the other worlds that would have been possible, but that were not compossible. So, I can say, the aggregate of all the possibles including the incompossibles forms chaos; that forms the disjunctive diversity, the “many”.
What I therefore judge myself to have shown is that this stage of the “many” – and here, it’s not a matter of forcing the texts – was really present, fundamentally present in Leibniz’s philosophy. Hence comes our question, indeed urgently: what can happen so that there is in this world, in this chaos, in this world of dizziness, something that is distinguished? This is as much the problem of physics as it is the problem of psychology. It’s the problem of physics, that is, of a constitution of the world, and it’s the problem of psychology, that is, the problem of perception. How am I able to distinguish? How can I have an idea? You understand here as well, there are people who believe that having an idea is a right, and that’s not reasonable since what is philosophy? This is not reasonable. Having an idea is a morning of celebration, or an evening of celebration. That happens for you, but that happens so rarely, having an idea. You have to note it down on your daily planner, “I had an idea”, [Laughter] actual occasion. You see, there is within having an idea, there’s an actual occasion, made of a concrescence and an ingression, something concrescent. You can note down the hour, the minute, all that. And one must not think that this can happen very often at all. And Leibniz, who has so many ideas, he did that. Once again, I am perpetually in the fog, each of you is in the fog, and those who think they aren’t are some kinds of cretins, that don’t know any better. Besides, Leibniz thought about this: the only people who are not in the fog are those reveal only their stubborn fixations (idées fixes). So, these cretins are still in the fog because these ones are very, very dangerous.
But, what is going to happen in my fog, in the fog of each of us, in the cosmic fog, in this fog that is the aleatory par excellence? Well, perhaps you recall one of our acquisitions from the previous session, as this all links up, specifically: coextensive with chaos, with this state of chaos, everything occurs as if we could define a primary filter, filtering chaos. The Latin word, taken up by Leibniz, is cribratio, filtrage, cribla that will yield criblatio, but originally it’s cribratio, filtrage, sifting. Fine, and I don’t know if you recall, at the last session, we saw, with the Baroque regime of light, I spoke to you of the action of light, action. I am not saying light itself. The action of light is to be a filter; this action presents itself as a filter that exerts itself and consists in filtering the deep shadows (ténèbres). It filters the shadows in order to extract what from them? If you recall, it extracts, the first extraction it will make from them, is to pull from the shadows something that is barely distinguishable. Leibniz would say that it is distinguished by a quantity smaller that any quantity that might be yielded, specifically, from filtering from the shadows the dark ground of colors, the dark depth of colors, that is, not yet a color – that would be too easy – the fuscum subnigrum [Pause] that is not confused with the shadows and that nonetheless is infinitely nearby.[13]
Fine, so there’s the blackish depth. You see, later, that could be translated, for example, in terms of German Romantic philosophy when the great Romantics go on to distinguish the depthless (sans-fonds), the beyond the depths, etc. You see that “beyond the depths” of colors, there is a depthlessness that is the shadows, the banished, and the filter, that is, the action of light, is going to pass, is going to brush against the shadows. This is going to be a brushing action of light; it’s going to brush against the shadows to extract from them the fuscum subnigrum, the blackish depth. You will say, we haven’t moved forward very much. On the contrary, yes we have! We’ve made enormous progress. This is already the potentiality of colors that you have brought forth. It’s marvelous! This filter is like a machine. You remember? We did this way at the beginning; we started off from these things.[14] What is a natural machine? A natural machine, for Leibniz, is a machine whose parts go to infinity, that is, a natural machine is a machine whose parts are machines, and parts of parts that are also machines. What is artificial in machines? It’s that they are natural elements. But a machine of nature no longer has any natural element; every element of the machine of nature is a machine.
The filter, the cribratio, is the primary machine of nature, and it selects, it grasps from the shadows the “many”, the aleatory distribution, this mixture of dust, this dizziness, etc. It seizes a dark depth of colors in optics; and what [about] in sounds? You sense that I am forced to speak… Of course, you’ll say, but no, I can’t again be talking about optics! No, there isn’t… All that, it doesn’t matter. You’ll grant it to me. It’s afterwards that we’ll see that all of this already had a basis, and for the moment, fine… But how does the screen (crible) act? If you grant to me that this seems to be of little importance, but that, in fact, it’s very important, this little difference of the shadows with the dark depth. If you grant to me that this is an amazing act, the cribratio as organization of the world, the primary organization of the world, and well, that ought to resemble something, for those of you who are familiar, [there is] another great, great philosopher, an ancient, who developed, developed in some sublime pages, this is Plato in Timaeus. And Plato in Timaeus developed a renowned theory under the name of the theory of the Chôra [Deleuze spells it out] that is presented according to terms that Plato used, theory of site – no, above all, not space, theory of site, since he says topos –, theory of the receptacle, or theory of the nourished. [Pause]
And it’s in Timaeus, I’m providing the reference because I’d like you to read it for the next time. It’s [line] 51 – You know that there are… For those who aren’t familiar, I’ll clarify: there is a numbering system that’s in all the editions, all the editions with different paginations, but the lines of text are numbered, corresponding to a constant numbering system so that it’s easy to find any text by Plato in any edition. – So this is 51 E to 53 C. “And why I am dying…” Wait. Why am I delighted to find this connection to Leibniz, of Leibniz’s filtrage, with the Platonic Chôra? Because they have been linked to Whitehead, and Whitehead, when he considers in Process and Reality, when he considers how one passes from disjunctive diversity to series, he says: it’s ether, it’s ether, a notion in physics that received throughout the history of physics some very, very different kinds of welcome, and that certain physicists maintain today in a very special sense, but that Whitehead maintained, and that he takes, it seems to me, in a very electromagnetic direction. Ether is finally the electromagnetic field for Whitehead. But ether was also one of Leibniz’s terms, in the theory of concrete movement, to distinguish a particularly subtle form of matter. I can say that it’s ether that is coextensive with the shadows and that grasps from them the dark depth, and that creates the primary organization. Ether is the first screen (crible). We must conceive of ether as a screen. And in his conception of ether, Whitehead says that the best approximation of what he understands by ether will be found in Plato’s theory of the receptacle in Timaeus. How does the screen act? But I can’t go on anymore, so we are stopping. [Pause] I hope you can’t go on any more.
I’d like for as many as possible among you to read Plato’s text, even only just to have a [sense]… It’s a splendid, very beautiful text. And now I’d like, before we separate, for those who want to intervene, those who have something to say, to add … Yes?
A student: [Inaudible question]
Deleuze: This is a very important question, so I’ll answer with two things. Yes, space and time are series, but these series presuppose series of matter. Here as well, just like Leibniz, Whitehead belongs to those who think that there is no empty space-time, but that space and time are fundamentally relative to what fills them. So, there is indeed a series of space and a series of time; there is indeed a spatiotemporal series, and indeed, very complex in Whitehead’s philosophy, but we cannot consider this until after all we still have to do. What I am saying does not yet presuppose any… It’s the series of space and of time that is a limit of the series I am discussing, even if the others are inseparable and not the reverse. Likewise, any [the Web Deleuze transcript picks up here] Platonic theory of the receptacle does not presuppose space-time, it’s the reverse. Space and time will be born in certain conditions. The question is very correct, but it is yet to come. [Question, same student] Ah, no, not actuality. The actual occasion is something that is completely in space and in time. My answer addressed what the relation is between space and time and the series, the initial series for the actual occasion.
The same student: [Inaudible question]
Deleuze: Yes, it’s the series that I’ve been speaking about for an hour, the series I’ve have ceaselessly discussed today, that are initial to the actual occasion, you remember? These are the conditions of the actual occasion, they [the series] are primary in relation to the actual occasion. So, if you will, in order, you have these series which condition the actual occasion, the series space-time, and the actual occasion. The actual occasion is certainly in space and in time.
Stengers: I have a question.
Deleuze: Yes?
Stengers: [Still barely audible][15]
Deleuze: In my opinion, no, but I am not certain that I am correct, but, on the other hand, I recognize you well here, because these are really your own concerns. But that’s not bad, it’s not at all a criticism. My example of light, if I invoked it, it’s a pure example that consisted of using something that cannot intervene at that moment, by right (en droit), but which has the advantage of providing an understanding of how a screen (crible) functions since, in fact, I said: the action of light consists in making a filter between shadow and dark ground (sombre fond) of colors, and on the contrary, the filter I mentioned made a filter between chaos and the dark ground, period. So I was not obligated to grant myself anything, in any case, like light. Does the screen – something more important in my view – does the screen already imply mirror equivalences? That would be extremely worrisome, that would be a big problem because, at that point, all the elements of the actual occasion would be there, so we must not. So, in my view, I think not. If we were obliged to include quasi-mirrors, that would complicate things a lot, but I hope there is no need for a quasi-mirror.
Stengers: When you read Whitehead to us, and you made your series of Q, Q1, Q2, Qn+1, this n+1, does that mean we continue like that to infinity, or does it just mean that we are in a space of three + one dimensions?
Deleuze: No, the symbols Q1, Q2, Q3, etc… It’s a series of characteristics, but each one animates a convergent series. Each characteristic has a convergent series, and on the other hand, you have an open, unlimited series of characteristics.
A woman student: [Inaudible; from the context, this seems to be a question about Bergson]
Deleuze: That would be very interesting, yes, but with one danger…
The student: [She continues speaking]
Deleuze: Yes, especially as he [Bergson] had an interest first, there’s his double interest for games and then, I don’t know… You know, you, [Deleuze speaks to a student nearby him] his relations with science? Did that interest him? He was perhaps aware of… [Affirmative response] He was familiar with the sciences, Bergson, but did physics interest him? [Several responses, including from Stengers] Yes, so there would be knowledge of physics… Yes, what you are saying is very interesting. This is the kind of thing that has to be done, you have to do it.
I just want to assure you of the extent to which the problem is common, but that has no interest for your project because, even if the problem isn’t common, they undergo entirely… It’s not entirely valid, but at that point, one must not make any juxtapositions that are too… But, it’s possible moreover that in fact — after all, what I’m saying is stupid, it’s true — that when we see the study of movement in Duchamp…
A student (nearby Deleuze): [Intervention suggesting a possible link, in New York, between Duchamp and Whitehead]
Deleuze: Yes, this is good, this is good. Fine, well then, read Plato [for next time]. [End of the session] [2:33:31]
  
Lecture 13, 17 March 1987: The Screen (le crible) and the Infinite
[I must give you] a bit of news, your choice whether it’s happy or sad news: I won’t be in Paris next Tuesday morning, I can’t be here. So our next meeting will only take place in two weeks [in principle, 31 March, although the next session is actually 7 April] as I noted down, right? Having said this, it’s not at all bothersome since we will finish later this year, so this won’t be ended, and when this is ended, we will stop. [Translation is faithful to the transcript. Deleuze’s meaning is unclear here, although this could simple mean, when we’re done, we’re done!] So there we are.
With this done, you recall where we are because it’s not difficult to understand, but this requires very close attention. My task is to consider closely with you this author about whom I have had such sadness that he has all but disappeared from the ordinary philosophical horizon, this author, [Alfred North] Whitehead. [Here begins the Web Deleuze transcript] And what do we expect from this confrontation between Whitehead and Leibniz? Of course, Whitehead is a great philosopher who was influenced by Leibniz. But what we expect is not simply a comparison, and it’s to the extent that Whitehead is a great philosopher that necessarily he proposes for us insights on Leibniz that can be fundamentally useful for us. [Pause] And we know at least the direction in which that can and will be useful for us. It’s like this kind of scream on which all of Whitehead’s philosophy rests, specifically: everything is event. “Everything is event” means what? That means that I am ready to reverse the so-called categorical schema subject/attribute. It’s the reversal of the subject/attribute schema of the kind: “the sky is blue”. You will tell me that he isn’t the first to do such a reversal. Well no, precisely we can be pleased that he’s not the first to have done so. For what does it mean to us that he’s second? That Leibniz was perhaps the first. And I told you, misunderstandings occur from the start. When you undertook reading a great mode of thought or appreciating a great work of art, there are difficulties at the beginning, and then afterwards, all goes well. It’s at the beginning that misunderstandings await you like kinds of crabs that are quite ready to grab you, and the misunderstandings are never our fault. There is an entire tradition weighing upon us. It’s everything that we have been told and everything that we have been led to believe. It’s an entire system of judgment that one must get rid of so that one can have an immediate relation with a great work.
And I was telling you, what has been more disastrous in our understanding of Leibniz than the idea that the great thesis of Leibniz: “every predicate is in the subject,” that this idea is precisely in order (conforme), and moreover that it implies the schema “subject-is-attribute” (est attribut)? This [understanding] was taken as an indisputable given that the inclusion of the predicate in the subject, in Leibniz’s thought, meant and implied the reduction of all judgment to a judgment of attribution, and that if Leibniz told us, “the predicate is in the subject,” that meant propositions were of the “the sky is blue” type, that is, of the judgment of attribution type. And I told you that if one starts off from — how to express this — a “naïve” reading of Leibniz, one forgets all that, or one forgets everything we’ve been told. We realize the complete opposite, and it’s a nice surprise, realizing exactly the opposite. And I was quoting the text Discourse of Metaphysics where Leibniz says: the predicate or the event, the predicate or event. So what is in the subject, specifically the predicate, is not an attribute.
And furthermore, one understands nothing in Leibniz’s philosophy if one doesn’t see that, from one end to the other in this philosophy, he never ceases breaking the categorical schema subject/attribute, and that the categorical schema subject/attribute is, on the contrary, Descartes’s thing. And that if Leibniz is so anti-Cartesian, it’s because he refuses the idea that judgment is a judgment of attribution, and that this refusal that judgment is judgment of attribution. That’s what he means in telling us that the predicate is in the subject, and when he tells us that the predicate is in the subject, that hardly means at all that judgment is judgment of attribution; it means the opposite. We saw this from the start. Hence I tell you that it’s already from Leibniz that the great affirmation arises: everything is event! Or rather, there is no object, there is no subject, we will see. The very forms of the object, the very forms of the subject result from the event as component of reality. The real is made of events. And the event is not an attribute, it’s a predicate, agreed; that is, the event is what is said. Predicate uniquely means: what is said. What is said is not the attribute, it’s the event. Everything is event.
Henceforth, as I was telling you, let’s start off from the simplest, any event at all. And it’s there that Whitehead awaits us. Let’s start off, once more, not from an attribution of the “the sky is blue” type, but from an event of the “a concert is being performed this evening” type. And the event is what Whitehead calls – to say something so innovative, you see the point to which philosophy, really, its sense is to elaborate extremely complex concepts for kinds of extremely simple givens (données) which are the givens of everyone. But precisely they would escape, they would never be manifested as givens if they were not exhibited by concepts. If you don’t construct relatively complicated concepts, how can we explain that the event is not simply something that happens, but is like the drop of reality, that it’s the ultimate given of the real? Sense that it’s already a very curious way of seeing. If you tell yourself that, that the event is the ultimate given of the real, you are forced to see things differently. You tell yourself: so, at that moment, I was thinking it was the table, the given of the real, [Deleuze strikes the table very hard] the table that resists me, so be it. But the table itself is event, the Great Pyramid is event, Whitehead tells us. And in what sense? Not in the sense in which it was created at some particular moment, no. It is event in the sense that it is here and now. And what is the table event? It’s the passage of Nature in a particular limit of space. Nature passes in particular limits of space. It’s the table event. And the duration of the table over a minute, over the two hours of our seminar time, it’s an event. Nature passes through the table. Nature passes through the table. It’s not a thing, it’s an event. You will tell me: why say that? It matters little why that’s said! It’s a question of knowing if what one says is beautiful, and if what one says is important. Why say this? Fine, we didn’t know it before; we cannot know it before.
So, starting from this point, it’s therefore the actual occasion, everything is actual occasion. The event is the actual occasion. Once again, a concert is being performed this evening. As we had seen, henceforth, Whitehead’s first problem – it’s here that I’d like to enumerate things – Whitehead’s first problem was: but what are the conditions for the event’s emergence?  You sense that it’s in fact a very special world; it’s a world of the perpetually new. Events never cease bursting forth, and always new events. The problem of philosophy will become the formation of the new (nouveauté). It’s very important; there are so many philosophies that presented themselves as philosophies of the determination of eternity. There you have one kind of philosophy, and when we have finally finished with all that, I would almost like to undertake a review of the topic of what we might draw from the question: “what is philosophy?” But, at that point, we will no longer speak of Whitehead or Leibniz, or if so, briefly, but in contrast, we will think about them greatly, as a function of such questions.
But so I am saying, for the moment, for the moment since we are not yet there, we have to mark [this] out well; just see the problem: what are the conditions for the emergence of an event? It’s a kind of genesis of the actual occasion. And that was our object the last time; we distinguished four steps. This is the first problem: the genesis of the actual occasion.[2] The second problem – you are waiting for it; I want this to be extremely clear in your mind – the second problem is: what is an actual occasion or an event composed of? Thus you will not confuse the conditions of the actual occasion with the composition of the actual occasion. Once I know the conditions under which an event or an actual occasion is produced, I will still have yet to consider fully what an event or an actual occasion is composed of. And I tell you, among Whitehead’s great books, it’s not so much in his great book, Process and Reality, that he speaks of the conditions of the actual occasion; it’s in this very beautiful book, The Concept of Nature.
And in this genesis of the actual occasion, we have seen that [Whitehead] distinguishes four moments. He starts off from chaos, from chaos-cosmos, a cosmos in the state of chaos, which he presents as pure disjunctive diversity. It’s just anything at all, it’s the membrae disjonctae. [Pause] Second instance, something that functions as screen and that he prefers to call Ether. [Pause] But you see that if I say Ether, it’s a word rather devoid of sense; if I say Ether in relation to the screen, that specifies it singularly. He will say as well an electro-magnetic field. And he also says: it’s what Plato talks to us about in the Timaeus, and it’s known by the Platonist word of Chôra, [Deleuze spells it out] the Chôra, presented by Plato as a screen.[3] This is the second instance.
The third instance is: from the action of the screen on the disjunctive diversity will emerge infinite series. The organization of chaos into infinite series, these infinite series enter into rapports of whole and parts. It’s vibration. How is it that vibration enters into rapports of whole and parts? The answer: — Let’s settle for some very, very simple things. Whitehead goes much farther as mathematician and as physicist, but we will settle for the simplest — insofar as vibration is inseparable from harmonics, and harmonics are sub-multiples. The frequency of the vibration is inseparable from harmonics, so that we will speak of sound harmonics as well as of color harmonics. As soon as there are vibrations, there are harmonics, that is, in infinite series. So we will say that the screen exerts itself over the disjunctive diversity, two exerts itself over one, to derive from this three, that is, infinite series that are not the final term. I assume that there is no final harmonics, neither in color nor in sound, so no final term and no limit. A fundamental thing: these series have no limit; they do not tend towards a limit. [Pause]
Fourth term or instance: that does not prevent vibrations from having internal characteristics. For example, a vibration that will yield sound, taking into account our organism, is not the same type as will yield color. Everything is vibration; vibrations have internal characteristics. We have seen this; we can say, for example, that vibrations destined to be sonorous – I say precisely “destined to be sonorous” since I do not yet have the means to engender sensible qualities – vibrations destined to be sonorous have internal characteristics that will be, for example, – I am speaking randomly here (je dis n’importe quoi) – duration, height, intensity, timbre. You see that it’s very different from harmonics; it’s another stage. It’s the internal characteristics of the vibration, the characteristics of vibration. Another vibration, for example one destined to yield color, will have internal characteristics what will be saturation, tint, value, range, (étendu),[4]  the range of color. I am saying: vibrations even are in relation with harmonics, that is, enter into rapports of whole and parts, but their internal characteristics form series, or rather the measure … – You will tell me that all this is going too fast because one would have to introduce a justification of measure. Why are the internal characteristics of vibration essentially, in their essence, subject to a measure? A genesis of measure is required. Fine, a genesis of measure is required! I will pass on that, since one can’t do everything. On the other hand, to my knowledge, Whitehead doesn’t do it, but we could do so. I feel almost capable of preparing the genesis of measure in this perspective. No matter, you will trust me.
I am saying that the measure of internal characteristics forms series that are not of the same type as the preceding ones. These are convergent series that tend toward a limit. I no longer find myself in front of infinite series the terms of which enter into rapports of whole and parts to infinity, without final term and without limit. I find myself facing a new type of series, specifically, the measure of internal characteristics of vibrations, forming convergent series that tend toward limits. [Pause] From that point onward, everything goes well for Whitehead: you have only to assume a conjunction of several convergent series, each one tending toward limits. You have a conjunction, the conjunction of at least two series, of two convergent series tending toward limits, defining the actual occasion. You simply have added the idea of conjunction of convergent series to that of convergence to obtain [it], and you have at least a definition of the event.
What is an event? Let’s try to climb back along our linkage. What is an event? It’s a very beautiful scientific-philosophical definition, there at this level, [where] there is no difference to be made between science and philosophy. I would say that an event is a conjunction of convergent series each tending toward a limit, [Pause] and each of which characterizing a vibration, that is, an infinite series entering into rapports of whole and parts. If I continue climbing back: under the influence of anything at all acting as a screen, in relation to an initial disjunctive diversity. I have an excellent definition of the event; I ask for nothing more. If I am told: what is an event?, that’s what I answer. And if I am told that it means nothing, I answer: ok, acknowledged, bye bye (au revoir). There is nothing to try to justify. There you are.
So, I say this quickly so you might follow me well because I am going to jump from one thing to another. First point – you see immediately what I want; it’s not like someone searching in a scholarly manner whether there is an equivalent in Leibniz. I want to start off from a brutal question: Is this schema like a beacon that causes something to be brought to light which is essential in Leibniz, but that the thickness of tradition had hidden from us, as if Whitehead, through his own conception of the event, had scraped away all sorts of useless levels that Leibniz had covered over? And my answer the last time was already yes. Let’s re-read Leibniz. Let’s re-read Leibniz and be sensitive to this: to what an extent, I don’t say everywhere and always, to what an extent in a certain number of texts he perpetually returns to a theme, the theme of the initial disorder. And this is good for us because, generally, one immediately says there is an order in Leibniz, and then we only reach these texts on the initial disorder too late. And immediately, Whitehead makes us want to start from there — in all of these texts by Leibniz, and especially as he gives some very concrete characteristics to these states of initial disorder.
I was telling you that he gives to them two sorts of characteristics, objective characteristics and subjective characteristics. You can grasp the initial disorder objectively and subjectively. You can do it yourself. Once again, you toss a handful of printer letters into the air. There you have a text by Leibniz that alludes to that. Or you have cannonballs on a battle field, cannonballs lying around there, a thousand, ten thousand scattered cannonballs on a battle field. This isn’t complicated, the initial disorder. Perhaps some among you remember one of the most beautiful texts by [T.E.] Lawrence, not the novelist, but Lawrence of Arabia. It’s the evening of a battle; he is in the desert dressed as an Arab, an evening before a battle against the Turks. And then there are cadavers on the battle field, and night falls, and he finds these cadavers to be strangely disordered. He is looking around at random; there is one spot where there are four cadavers, a spot where there’s just one, and then nothing. And here you have this strange man who begins to pile up these cadavers, making regular piles of them. It’s a rather obscure text, [where] one feels the dark soul of Lawrence of Arabia. One even senses inexpressible goals, but the fact is that he begins to arrange the cadavers on the battlefield, as the other [writer] invites us to arrange the cannonballs. It’s truly the passage from one stage to the other, from the initial disorder to something else. Arranging cannonballs, what would that mean? It would mean that they are no longer to be counted one by one, Leibniz tells us; that is, you have to make a series. There is only one way of exiting from chaos, it’s by making series. Series is the first word after chaos, the first babbling [balbutiement]. Gombrowicz wrote a very interesting novel, entitled Cosmos [1966], in which he launches forth as novelist in the same attempt. Cosmos is pure disorder, it’s chaos, and how to emerge from chaos? … Yes?
Question : (Inaudible)
Deleuze : Yes? This is what film? [Deleuze listens closely] … Yes, so, that would go in the same direction. So look at Gombrowicz’s novel. It’s beautiful, how series are organized starting from chaos, especially as there are two unusual series that are organized: a series of hung animals, hung sparrows, hung chickens. It’s a series of hangings. And then there is a series of mouths, a mouth series, a series of chickens, how they interfere with each other, how little by little they go on to trace an order in the chaos. It’s an odd novel, but in the end, we wouldn’t have finished if we threw ourselves into all this. But, I’m saying that, in Leibniz, you have all these themes: to introduce an ordering within the initial disorder. And you understand that if he is so interested in the calculation of chances, in the calculation of probabilities, this can only be within the perspective of this problem.
But the subjective states, that is, the subjective equivalent of the problem, are no less interesting. I was telling you that Leibniz is the author who introduced, if you will, into philosophy something like a fundamental affective tonality. All of philosophy has its fundamental affective tonalities. I was saying, look at Descartes: this is a man of suspicion, such a man of suspicion. That’s his affective tonality, suspicion. So that permits everything; in fact, it permits all the stupidest interpretations, but I believe rather that one must extract the affective tonality, and then what makes up the psychoanalysis of an affective tonality is strictly stripped of any interest. Rather one must see what it [the tonality] becomes when it is placed back into the aggregate of philosophical concepts, and the suspicion in Descartes becomes doubt. That becomes doubt; that becomes an entire method of certainty: how to arrive at conditions under which I am sure that I am not being wronged. That’s Descartes’s problem: I am being wronged (on me trompe). These are screams (des cris). When I tell you that you cannot understand philosophy if you don’t insert therein the necessary screams (les cris qu’il faut), philosophers are people who scream, but simply they scream with concepts. I am being wronged, I am being wronged – that’s Descartes’s very own thing! I am not going to tell him he’s wrong: no, you’re not being wronged. First, he’d have nothing left to say, if I told him that. You understand, that’s why, once again, I do not cease telling you that philosophy has nothing to do with arguments. Imagine that, if we began by telling Descartes [this], can you imagine? [Here begins a 33-minute interruption of the Web Deleuze transcript and recording]
In the end, no one holds this against Descartes, but he says that even an evil genie, even God wrongs him. That’s very interesting. One might say that this is a madman’s idea. It would be a madman’s idea if there weren’t a philosophical system. What is the difference between madness and philosophy? It’s on the level of this kind of problem that one must pose the question, and not on the level of psychoanalyzing the philosopher. It’s what relation is there between Descartes’s “I am being wronged” and the corner paranoid guy’s “I am being wronged.” So there you have the problem of the philosophy-madness rapport.
And well, I was telling you that this is Leibniz. His affective tonality is not “I am being wronged” because he just doesn’t care about that. Of course, he is wronged, and so then? So what! That’s why, so then, he has his screen. But of course, he is wronged, but we will see. If there weren’t a screen to distinguish true and false – no, not in order to distinguish true and false – for what is awful, for Leibniz, it’s not that he might be wronged. What’s awful is that Leibniz’s mind is not his own (pas sa tête à lui-même). He does not have his own mind. It’s not his mind. And this too is a serious illness. [Laughter] It’s not his mind. One has to imagine him living in a kind of dizziness (étourdissement). He has neither his own mind, nor his own ears. [Pause] All that buzzes in his head; it whistles in his ears. [Pause] However, he seems to be in good health, but you know, one has to be wary, right? [Pause] That is, his fundamental state is dizziness that he will tell us is nothing other than death; it is death. Death is only generalized dizziness. Death is not what comes after the dizziness; it’s a dizziness that one does not feel. [Pause] When I say my ears whistle, yes, there’s an entire uproar. My head is filled with noises, with parasites. And I was telling you, so that in such a mode of living, how do you imagine that achieving a truth, even reaching an idea or shadow of an idea wouldn’t be a cause to celebrate? I am completely stupefied.
And Leibniz’s splendid, splendid analysis, the most concrete analyses from the viewpoint of affective tonality, it’s on the states of dizziness [Pause] that are like states in which I can no longer distinguish perception and the hallucination of states of hallucinatory perception. About all this, perhaps some of you might tend to say, oh well, all that is very old philosophy that we’ve known for a very long time thanks to phenomenology [saying] not to confuse hallucination and perception, no more than imagination and perception. So hallucinatory perception refers to an indeed aged philosophy.
Here is where I’d like to open a very short parenthesis. Do not believe that nothing is ever gained (acquis), and if I speak of hallucinatory perception, this is as a function of what I mentioned, that on Tuesday the 31st [March] – since there won’t be a session on the 24th, I remind you; I am saying this again because I am certain that there are some among you that haven’t yet noticed this – well, when we will be trying to draw some conclusions about “what is philosophy,” I believe that we will see the extent to which all these questions – is there a difference of nature between perception and imagination such that speaking of hallucinatory perception has no sense? – well, we will see that all these problems must be readdressed and above all still imply certain conceptions of philosophy such that they are not posed in the same way according to one conception or another. Once again, it’s not that philosophers were saying anything different thing. Everything depends on the kind of problem that you present.
Euh, I mean something quite simple: it’s that if phenomenology can distinguish perception and imagination in such a way that hallucinatory perception might be a notion that has lost all sense, this is because, to employ their own formulation, it [phenomenology] provides itself with wild experience (expérience sauvage), what Merleau-Ponty called, for example, wild experience, a particularly reasonable and already organized idea. But, in fact, if one wonders about what a wild experience is, it’s obvious that this must be – well, it’s [not] obvious… — it’s possible that this is an experience prior to the screen, whereas phenomenology has never been able to do without the screen. It’s always put forth something already screened. But before the screen, how could you distinguish between perception and imagination? Before the screen, there is only hallucinatory perception. There are only states of being anesthetized (états d’endormissement), of half-dreams, of stupefaction, of vertigo.
And I was saying, so in Leibniz, if we want a perfect state, after your previous analyses, we have this perfect state; I’d say that Leibniz’s disorder or chaos is the aggregate of all possibles. It’s the aggregate of all possibles. This would be a very Leibnizian definition of chaos. Why would this be a very Leibnizian definition of chaos? Perhaps you recall why? It’s quite simple. You recall that all possibles are possible, but are not compossible with one another; that is, we have to choose between the compossible aggregates. If I think of the aggregate of all possibles, this is pure chaos. If I think of the aggregate of all possibles independently of the relations of compossibility in which they are distributed, I have pure chaos. I can say that in Leibniz, chaos is the aggregate of all possibles. It matters little in the end. It’s this state of hallucinatory perception.
Fine, and I was saying, at this point the screen arises, [Pause] here’s where a screen arises. So, you see, in this light, I can say that this corresponds entirely with Whitehead. It’s the second moment. We are passing into the second moment. And fine, the screen, what is this for Leibniz? We must not be shocked to find, for example, in a text from his youth, “Theory of concrete movement”, we find the same word that Whitehead will use: it’s ether. [Pause] In fact, it’s an old word, an old word. He cannot speak about an electromagnetic field; science in Leibniz’s era does not include this idea of electromagnetism, but what does he speak about? We have seen this. We can think of some relative screens in order to get an idea, which wouldn’t be the true, ultimate screen. Yet again, to get this idea, it’s an approximation. We can only approach the ultimate screen, of pure ether, that there exerts its screening action in relation to a pure chaos. We can only have approximations. We are already so greatly in an organized and pre-organized world.
And as we have seen, we saw at least two cases. We had seen a screen on the level of light, and I told you, well yes, you can compare the action of light to a screen. And the screen passes between what and what? Between pure disorder, which is what? The shadows, that is, an infinitely perforated (trouée) matter, a matter perforated with caverns, these caverns themselves referring to caverns, matter perforated with caverns to infinity, that is, that no longer reflects nor refracts light. The shadows are precisely what neither reflects nor refracts light. Well, the shadows are defined by this world of caverns, of caverns within caverns to infinity.
And there’s a screen, and from the shadows defined as such, the screen is going to extract what? We have seen it in the conception of light. As much in discerning from so-called Baroque painting as from Leibniz’s text, what the luminous screen is going to discern, to extract from the shadows is what is called the dark depth of all colors. And notice that there is a very small difference between the shadows and the dark depth of colors, and nonetheless something essential is at play in this small difference. From the dark depth of colors, colors effectively will emerge, that is, events of refraction, according to Leibniz, elements of refraction of the light ray. [Pause] This small difference will have been necessary between the shadows, that is, the niger, and the dark depth of colors, that is, the fuscum subnigrum, the blackish depth. [Pause] So, were we correct in finding that [depth] in at least an entire current of so-called Baroque painting, that is, in works by Tintoretto and Caravaggio?[5] You were free to see it in this way yourselves. But we were seeing there the example of the screen.
The other example was an example of sound. I insist on pursuing my two examples: the sound vibration and the visual vibration. And we were saying, well yes, disorder, chaos, what is that? Sound chaos is this kind of uproar of the sea, the equivalent of the dizziness that Leibniz constantly evokes. I am near the sea or I am near a water-mill. He needs a mill; a river isn’t enough. He needs a mill in the river, necessarily, to create some noise, right? The mill’s wheel, a mill wheel is necessary. I am near the water-mill; I am near the sea; I am so close to the sea. And we no longer know. We’d have to enter into the situation of someone who hears the sea for the first time, this infinite uproar, this incredible uproar, this incredible uproar that expresses the chaos of drops of water each in relation to the others. [Pause] Fine, you see, it’s the equivalent of the shadows, the noise arising from the depth of the sea.
And then, if I imagine a screen of sound, what is that going to yield? Here I am anticipating what is remaining, on what we haven’t yet started at all, but a kind of geometry of perception, with the condition of taking it as an infinitesimal geometry, notably, one that is going to initiate – no matter that we don’t at all understand what I am saying here for the moment; it’s like a coming attractions announcement – fine, that is going to initiate an aggregate of differential relations, refers to infinitesimal calculus, an aggregate of differential relations, [End of the cassette; interruption in the BNF recording]… perception, [Pause] integration in a perception of the noise of the sea, of this uproar. This will be produced… Yes?
Question: [Inaudible, regarding Maurice Blanchot and his novel, Thomas the Obscure]
Deleuze: To Thomas the Obscure? We’d have to see. [Deleuze listens to the student’s comments] Yes, yes, yes, yes. We’d have to see. I am reacting; I don’t have sufficiently in mind if there’s something equivalent to dizziness, the primary dizziness. I am going to tell you, Blanchot is still something else, eh? His own affective tonality is not dizziness; it’s something he never hid, fatigue, [Laughter] fatigue, but fatigue is teeming, extremely teeming. There are relations between dizziness and fatigue. Yes, just as I suggested to you in relation to Gombrowicz, we’d have to create the relation with Thomas the Obscure… Yes?
Question/Intervention by Richard Pinhas: In the physics, in the physiology of sound, the noise of the sea is what is called “white noise” that is the purely undifferentiated, notably the same intensity so that harmonies… [Deleuze: That’s it! (In commenting, he blocks out what Pinhas says) … exactly the same. From the moment in which we [notice] that it’s undifferentiated, we effectively have a bodily relation of perception that it’s undifferentiated.
Deleuze: So that connects basically, that is, the equivalent in the domain of sound to cases in the visual [domain], this white noise… Repeat that slowly, your definition of white noise.
Pinhas: The definition of white noise, it’s a noise that has exactly the same dynamic, that is, which is calculated in decibels, that has exactly the same dynamic in all the octaves, in all the frequencies, and in all harmonies, that is, the purely undifferentiated. There’s a very simple curve, like so, [He writes on the board] with power in decibels, in dynamics. Here the values of fundamental harmonies, finally, all the frequencies that one would like, will have exactly the same script everywhere. Whereas a sound is defined by a curve, here we have a purely undifferentiated, as something like a kind of cosmic continuum. And a cutting action, a filtering action will be necessary that will be the equivalent of this sieve, what we find in the Chôra, in order to have a relation of differentiation between what we call perception, perception of what is perceived, and the now different, differentiated sound. So long as there’s no cutting in the undifferentiated, in this white noise, so long as there’s no filtering in this white noise, there will be this undifferentiated that is totally the same.
Deleuze: I want to say that there’s something stupid that bothers me. Why do they call it “white”?
Pinhas: Euh, it’s a definition… There are several types of noise. There’s pink noise, white noise… [Another student: And the blue note?] [Laughter] No, no, no, no, that has nothing to do with this.
Deleuze : But why don’t they call it “black noise”? [Another student: This is an absence of colors!] Yes, it’s an absence of colors, but what bothers me in this is that it creates an imbalance of the sound-color parallelism. I mean that passing to white light, on the contrary, that [light] is on the side of what is going to cause the filter to act, completely on the other side. So, obviously, they didn’t know. – [Deleuze speaks directly either to Pinhas or to another student near him] You know what you’re going to do? You note down for me, you take a piece of paper and you note down the definition immediately because I’ll lose it and that will go to shit, [Laughter] so you note it down right away. Do you have a pencil? Do you have what you need? Do you have something to write on? Fine. —
So, there we are, I am talking about this screen story, let’s get back to it. There’s a common source in Whitehead, in Leibniz, and I was telling you [at the 10 March session] that this is Plato’s great text, the Timaeus. So, I wanted to comment on it at length, and then I told myself, that’s going to get very complicated because it’s going to add to this a third side. I don’t want you to make a… This is an extraordinary text, then, the Timaeus, because I indeed believe, first, that it’s a unique text by Plato, on a fundamental notion. There’s only one text… And I am telling you about this because the text is so beautiful, yet so difficult.
In Plato’s writings, we are used to Plato distinguishing two things: models, eternal models, otherwise known as Ideas; and then, Becoming, or the what-is-becoming (le ce qui devient) — it’s not the same thing, Becoming, or the what-is-becoming, but finally, let’s keep them together – and the Becoming, or the what-is-becoming endures the imprint of the models. You see? [Pause] So fine. Obviously that’s too simple. But, first point, here’s what is in this text. [Deleuze refers to elements of the Timaeus, notably to sections 51e to 53c indicated as the assignment at the 10 March session] Plato tells us there’s a third thing, and moreover, we have to expect that this third thing reacts onto the two others, that is, that this is more than we might have believed. It’s not simply a third thing that gets added on. How do you expect to add on a third thing without revising everything? And this third thing, he speaks – here’s the admirable text – as if he were talking about things linked to mysteries. It’s since Nietzsche that we know that the Greeks admired mysteries. These [things] are linked to great mysteries. – Already? [Pause; Deleuze seems to have read or heard something that surprises him] Ah, ok… Ten, it’s a minimum, right? … Fine…
What is this [mystery]? I am saying that I want to talk to you about a thing that one hardly speaks of. [Deleuze speaks here in the voice of Plato] Why? Because we only see it in a … We can even see it, but is this really seeing? – So this is some great Plato, this text is sublime, splendid – Can we really speak about it? Or do we draw conclusions about it based on reason? It’s like through a veil. [Pause] It’s like being in a kind of dream, a kind of dream. [See the Timaeus, 52b] And it’s in this kind of dream that the thing tells me, what does this thing tell me, the screen? “An entire site…” (Tout un lieu…) That’s it: I perceive a something in a kind of dream. You’ll tell me, as a way of speaking about a screen, this is odd. Well yes, that’s because the screen is strange. The more the text continues, the more we notice that this screen is frightening, that it consists exactly of a living membrane, as if the whole world depended on a living membrane, a monstrous [Greek word from the Timaeus],[6] which is animated by… So, on what is this screen, this screen telling you “An entire site”? We have to understand why we only perceive it in a dream. This is because there was no site (lieu) before. It’s the screen that assigns sites. So, everything is a site; I can only speak this announcement in a kind of dream, in a dizzying revelation.
What how does this screen function? The more the text advances, the more we learn this: it receives jolts from what comes to fill it. What comes to fill it? We don’t know yet, but the fact is that what comes to fill it, or comes to touch it, this membrane, is going to give it jolts.[7] Fine. What comes to fill it? Tiny geometric figures; these are tiny geometric figures, triangles, pointy triangles, some isosceles triangles, some equilateral triangles.[8] And how does it react? I should explain that these triangles are, in fact, component elements of the great qualities or the great elements, fire, earth, and water [and air]. Fire, earth and water [and air] are made of tiny triangles of different natures. So, each of the elements tends… We assume that these elements resist the screen, but they are in a state of disjunctive diversity. They form a kind of chaos. Already, you see, I can say [that] these figures, these triangles are not the Ideas themselves, the Ideas with a capital I. The eternal models are never in a state of chaos.
So what are these triangles, these little triangles, in relation to…? Ah, this gets enormously complicated since Plato tells us, [in] a passage close to the one I am citing, that the triangles are already images. They are little images, little images, so Ideas, eternal models. But how can images, Ideas, eternal models be in a state of chaos? This is truly complicated. So fine, let’s assume that all these little figures are cases of chaotic distribution like, I was saying, I toss a fistful of printer’s letters into the air. Here, I toss little figures into the air. They fall down onto my screen, this living membrane – awful, it’s, it’s awful! It’s a beast! One must imagine this screen as a beast. So, fine.
Under the top of these pointed triangles, the membrane reacts. It never seizes a figure; it never seizes a figure. The screen has no figure, but it reacts to the figure points that it receives, as if it secreted a kind of acid. And by reacting to the figures it receives, it reacts onto the figures. And what is the direction of its reactions on the figures? It separates them. In Plato’s writing, I’d say that it forms separate series, [Pause] or says Plato, under the action of the screen, the similar reconnects with the similar, specifically triangles of one sort are going to reconnect with triangles of the same sort or, if you prefer, air is going to reconnect with air, fire is going to reconnect with fire, water is going to reconnect with water, earth is going to reconnect with earth. Earth is a very special case, in fact, but I am not going into its details, I don’t have the time, but for earth, there are complications, fortunately, that Plato created and that he really needs. In other words, by separating and organizing series of figures, the screen assigns a site to each element. Fire will be above the world, earth will be down below, air will be between the two, water on the earth, etc. Each element will have a site. The screen assigns the site by forming series of similar things. You see?
I’d say, fine, that seems to me… It’s interesting over the centuries, and I don’t mean that Whitehead was doing some Plato, [nor to] compare the echoes of one great philosopher with another. Whitehead told us: the screen’s action consists of this, organizing series of which the members enter into relations of whole and parts. Plato told us: organizing definite series through attraction of the similar, that is, the series constituted by homogeneous or similar terms. And even, for Plato, that will not suffice, this action of the screen, but here, it will no longer be the screen that acts. Moreover, the screen, you see, will have to arrive in the end at a kind of death, a becoming death. Each element is sent back into its site, the similar attracts the similar, the similar series are constituted. In other words, it’s the screen that separated the things such that a new operation, a second operation will be required, just as in Whitehead, a second operation is necessary. Simply, the great difference at this level is that the second operation is not longer the screen that’s responsible, in Plato. It’s God, that which, no doubt, was already managing the screen, but who, for the second operation, will not longer employ the screen. And this second operation consists of guaranteeing the transformation of elements into one another, that is, of going beyond the separation. You see? But then, a follow-up to the first operation of the screen is required. I don’t mean that this is the same thing. We saw in Whitehead that it’s very different because starting from the screen, you have two operations, the series entering into relations of parts-whole, specifically vibrations, and starting from there, the convergent series that tend toward a limit [Return to the Web Deleuze transcript] and that concern the vibrations’ characteristics, or rather, that concern measuring the vibrations’ characteristics. There we are.
So, I refer you to… I wanted to comment on this at greater length, but I tell myself that we’ll get lost in all this, so there’s no point. In any case, I say, imagine the screen as a veritable machine, in the sense that Leibniz told us: it’s the machine of Nature. In the sense that Leibniz told us: Nature is the entire machine, but simply it’s a type of machine about which we have no idea, we, humans, who create only artificial machines, since the true machine, that of Nature, it’s truly Nature that is machine; we don’t know how to create machines. The real machine is the one in which all its parts are machines, that is: the infinite machine. Whereas we, in our machines, very rapidly, after a certain number of operations, we have to collide with this: it’s a length of iron, our machines; they have parts that are not machines to infinity, you see, whereas machines of Nature are machines to infinity.
The screen is the type of a machine to infinity. About this, I am in good shape, in a certain way, to state what happens in Leibniz after the screening (le criblage), [Pause] but that’s thanks to Whitehead, I believe, since in Leibniz, I find two levels that are going to correspond to two series in Whitehead. Is this true, or am I forcing the texts? Here, it’s an ordeal [épreuve]. One can force a little bit, but one has no right to force a lot. How will I say [it]? It’s a question of good taste (bon goût) in philosophy. The existence of good taste in philosophy is very simple: we cannot make just any one say just anything. And I believe that it’s the same thing as good taste for interpretation, quite simply. Any interpretation is a matter of good taste. If you do not exercise good taste, you will fall into abominable vulgarities, and worse, these will be vulgarities of thought. So you can very well tell me: no, you are exceeding good taste, but you can just as well tell me: you are maintaining the limits of good taste. I am persuaded that I maintain the limits of good taste, that is, of the strictest truth when I say: look at Leibniz’s texts. Obviously they are scattered, but tough. [Laughter] 
I notice a first kind of text, texts in which Leibniz speaks to us explicitly of infinite series that are characterized by this, that they enter, or that their terms enter into rapports of the whole and parts. [Pause] There are a lot of Leibniz’s texts on this whole-parts rapport, and on the variations of this rapport. These series that enter into rapports of whole-parts, we call them extensions, in conformity with Leibniz. These will be extensions. Does that mean the extension (l’étendue)? Yes and no. The extension (ending in e), that is, what Leibniz translates as l’extensio, but extension has two senses: the extension is at once the extension or expanse with an e, an extension (étendue), and also it’s the genre to which the extent belongs, specifically everything that comes back into rapports of whole and parts. But you will tell me: but what else is there than the extent [ending in] e? It’s important for what’s coming (l’avenir), you’ll see. What else is there than the extension [ending in e], for returning into rapports of whole and parts? Anything that you want: number, time, lots of things. We would find others if we looked. In any case, number, time, these are examples that Leibniz offers the best. It’s the family of extensions. I would say that these are infinite series, and much more, let us add to this, matter, under which form? Matter, not under just any form, matter insofar as [it’s] divisible to infinity. There is no smallest part of matter, there is no greatest whole of matter. There will always be a greater whole, there will always be a smaller part. Everything that enters to infinity into rapports of whole and parts, that constitutes an infinite series with neither final term nor limit. [Pause]
I am saying that any rational number can be expressed in such a series. It’s the regime of… The extensio is all corresponding to the rule (I’m speaking Latin, it’s not my fault) partes extra partes, that is, the exteriority of the parts, the parts each exterior in relation to the others, to infinity. If you take a tiny bit of matter, however small, you can still divide it, partes extra partes. There you are. You will find a lot of that in Leibniz, and analyses of the whole-parts rapport. Moreover, he attaches so much importance to this that he considers that basic propositions on the whole-parts rapport are axioms, but that these axioms, furthermore, are demonstrable. It doesn’t matter; [if] we had the time, we could devote an entire session on this problem of extensions. But as we have a different purpose, we pass this by, and are passing along quickly. But we have located this type of series that, in my opinion, is an absolutely consistent region by having its unity.
And then, in other texts, or in neighboring texts, you see a very different type of series in Leibniz. And what creates my difficulty is that, obviously, he can’t do everything, no one can do everything. So, he didn’t create the theory of difference between these two types of series; he had so many other things to do. – [Noise is heard from the doorway] Could the door not squeak?… We need to bring a bolt… Fine, here we are. So, euh… [Pause] — The other type of series is what? I organize the texts in groups. First sort of texts: Leibniz tells us that irrational numbers are something different from rational numbers. You recall that rational numbers are the aggregate of negative wholes and fractions; irrational numbers are numbers that express a relation between two incommensurable magnitudes (grandeurs). A fraction – I always have a concern: a misunderstanding that you must avoid is thinking that a fraction irreducible into a whole number is the same thing as an irrational number. You recall, it’s not at all the same. If you say two sevenths, two over seven, this is a fraction irreducible into whole numbers, so it’s an infinite series, but an extensive infinite series, of the type that we were just discussing. Why? It’s because two sevenths doesn’t prevent you from having two sides, numerator and denominator, with a common magnitude: two quantities of this magnitude in the numerator, and seven quantities of this magnitude in the denominator. A fraction, even irreducible, places into relation perfectly commensurable quantities, since you have two x of this quantity in the numerator, seven x of this quantity in the denominator. An irrational number, on the other hand, places into relation quantities that have no common measure, that is, that you cannot express in the form of a fraction, since the fraction form implies common measure. Thus I assume that this is well understood.
So there you have a first sort of text: irrational numbers imply another type of series, which is what? They are themselves limits of a convergent series. It must be found, simply. Pi is an irrational number; the famous number pi is an irrational number. It’s a contest, in Leibniz’s era; I believe that Leibniz is the first to have found the series into which one could place pi. At the outside, what series is it? Leibniz will find it in the form of pi over 4, which is the limit of an infinite convergent series. One has to wait quite a long time, that is, I think well into the eighteenth century, for this to be demonstrated. – Leibniz doesn’t provide a demonstration for it; he gives the formula without demonstration. Did he have it? That I don’t know; in any case, one must wait for the eighteenth century. That happens often. They move fast, mathematicians; that’s what’s so great. In their rough drafts, one mustn’t think that they proceed like in a book; in their drafts, they sometimes produce flashes after which one has to wonder for twenty years how they got there, how they found that. We have to await a mathematician named [Johann] Lambert within the eighteenth century for the demonstration of pi over 4 as the limit of an infinite convergent series, and that it’s indeed an infinite convergent series. That’s the first case.
Second case: we have things that are internal characteristics. These internal characteristics are their requisites, an essential Leibnizian term: these are their requisites. These requisites return into convergent series that tend toward limits. [Pause] These convergent series tend toward limits – that, I believe, is fundamental, all that is so fine, so satisfying… This is what Leibniz… You can invent the word. Let’s do an exercise of terminology. In philosophy, when terminology emerges, I have just baptized my first series: infinite series that have no final term and that have no limit; they enter into whole-parts rapport. Henceforth it’s extremely well founded to call them extensions; this will be a little strange since at that moment, I would be forced to say: hold on, extension in the ordinary sense of the word is only a particular case of extensions. And then I fall upon a new type of series: convergent series tending toward limits. Suddenly I tell myself: I have no choice, I need a word. I need a word out of commodity, not just to be clever; it’s out of commodity since I have baptized my first series, and otherwise no one will be able to understand anything. Hence the terminological act in philosophy is the true poetry of philosophy. It’s absolutely necessary.
So I have the choice: either a currently existing word that I will use. At that moment, I seize it from current language and I devote it, I devote it to a particular sense, exactly as a musician can seize a noise, or like a painter can seize a nuance or a shade and, at the outside, bring it onto the canvas. Here I would tear a word from current language, and I want to grasp it, and then if it resists, I pull it hard. Or, if there is no word, I will have to create it. And it’s so utterly stupid to say that philosophers fabricate complicated words for their pleasure. Yes, the vapid opne [nuls], of course, the vapid ones do that. But a discipline has never been judged by its nullities. The great ones never do that; when they create a word, first it’s a poetic splendor. Imagine! As soon as we get used to a philosophical word, that’s precisely why philosophers are no longer understood, but imagine the force of the word “monad”! You and me, we are monads. That’s fantastic. It’s enough to rediscover the freshness of the word to rediscover Leibniz’s poetry and his strength, that is, his truth.
So I must have a word, and it’s shameful that you haven’t already found it for me; you will realize that it was the one that Leibniz found. And it’s uniquely out of modesty and timidity that you aren’t speaking up all at once. There is only one word, so in this I have no choice: we have to call this second series the intensio, these are the intensio, in Latin with an “s”. Just as the infinite series that organized itself in whole-parts constituted extensions, the infinite convergent series tending toward limits constitute intensions, that is, their terms will be degrees, and no longer parts. And at this level, I see outlining itself the possibility of a theory of intensities that picks up from the preceding theory of extensities. And in fact, the internal characteristics – this isn’t in Whitehead, it’s in Leibniz, but they complete each other greatly. The internal characteristics that define and that constitute or enter into infinite convergent series tending toward limits are intensities. I would say that seems strange, but in this, I have no choice. I must show that, concerning sound, even duration is an intensity, all the more so for the intensity of sound properly speaking, even the height of an intensity, even the timbre. And in fact, each of these intrinsic characteristics enters into convergent series. I mean, one mustn’t exaggerate here, but what does it mean in serial music when Boulez is praised for having imposed the series, including on timbres? In serialism in music, everything wasn’t just suddenly series. We are told in the dictionary of music that Boulez placed timbre itself into series.
Fine, no matter, we’ll forget this all too modern reference that has no use for us. It’s each of these internal characteristics that is, in power (puissance), a series, a convergent series tending toward limits. It’s the status of requisites. I would say that height, duration, intensity and timbre are the requisites of sound, and this will be very Leibnizian. I would say that tint, saturation, value and range (étendu)[9] are the requisites [Pause] of color. I would say more generally, since all these are examples from afterward, I’d say more generally that range – you will tell me that [with] range, you don’t have the right. Yes, I do have the right. Earlier I was talking about extension (ending in “e”), extensio (étendue). Now, fortunately, the Latin has more possibilities in this area, now Leibniz, when he tells us: matter has l’étendu for a characteristic, it’s no longer l’étendue/extension [ending in] “e”, it’s range (étendu). It’s no longer l’extensio, which would be difficult for us, praise God; it’s l’extensum, which really prefers not to be confused with l’extensio. And yet, in certain texts, Leibniz confuses them. What happens then? Of course, in certain texts he confuses them, when the problem [he addresses] is not about distinguishing them. When he groups them together, for example, the two kinds of series, he has no reason to specify the differences. On the other hand, when he takes the second type of series in its specificity, there he needs to indicate the difference, and he will insist that l’extensum must not be confused with l’extensio.
So I would say that matter has several internal characteristics – understand that this is going to be very important for us, for what’s coming — several! Every thing has several internal characteristics; there is not a thing that has only a single requisite. There is a profound pluralism in Leibniz. And matter has for requisite l’extensum, that is, range [l’étendu without “e”], but resistance also, but gravity also, and why not continue? But density also. All these have limits. These are internal characteristics or limits of convergent infinite series, but also active force. And perhaps you understand suddenly why Leibniz was so repulsed by the Cartesian idea that extension, in general, might be a substance. It was either a simple extensio, an infinite series, or it was a requisite of matter. Is it truly matter? No, one must say, almost, that it’s the subject of all these requisites, all these series: it’s what there is that’s real in matter. One mustn’t be surprised that, shortly thereafter, Kant defines intensity precisely in its rapports with what is real in matter. For, especially for Leibniz, everything is not real in matter. But at the point where we are, I can say: all reality in matter is, or enters into, an infinite convergent series tending toward a limit, or rather, enters into several infinite convergent series tending toward limits, these limits being the requisites of the thing. You remember, if you indeed remember, that we did that from the start of the first term (trimestre). We saw and analyzed the notion of requisite very quickly. Fine. There we have the second [type of series].
I would like to conclude here on this point. You already have the idea of a certain conjunction. At the level of the real in matter, you have not only infinite convergent series tending toward limits, but you have a kind of conjunction of series at the level of the real, in matter, since the real in matter has several internal characteristics. There is no reality that has a sole characteristic. Sense that this is going to be essential for the theory of substance and for [Leibniz’s] opposition to Descartes. For in Descartes, substance has a single attribute and is defined by this attribute. You realize how much [Descartes] was suspicious: two attributes were too much, that would have wronged him. On the other hand, Leibniz found it comical that a substance would have only a single attribute. For him, it was grotesque. In any case, there is nothing in the world without a plurality of requisites. Fine.
With what does that connect? There is already conjunction. I add that Leibniz is ahead of Whitehead. It’s odd, it’s aggravating because Whitehead goes much farther. [Leibniz] adds a third kind of series. The more there are, the better this will be. This third kind of series – I remind you about it because we analyzed it in detail — is when one gets to monads, that is, possible existences. Each monad is defined by a convergent series, that is, by a portion of the world. But in this, these are convergent series that prolong themselves into one another in order to form a compossible world. This time, it’s no longer the conjunction of several convergent series through which reality passes, but the prolongation of convergent series into each other, corresponding to several realities. So that’s all quite good.
I say then that all that leads us to the same result. What I mean is, what are these two types of series in Leibniz? I leave the third one aside – complete it yourselves since we’ve seen it, I won’t return to the topic, the extensities and intensities. — I believe you must remember: when one has analyzed what happened in God’s understanding, according to Leibniz, we have seen God’s understanding was thinking simple notions. [Interruption of the BNF recording] And there are three sorts of simple notions. It’s essential for Leibniz’s logic. First sort of simple notions were the infinite forms through self, that is, the forms that I can think as infinite by themselves. These were absolutely simple notions, or what Leibniz called: the Identicals. Not that one is identical to the other, but each of these simple notions was identical to itself. They connect to a first type of infinity, the infinite through self. [Return to the BNF recording] It was the infinite through self, the Identicals, the simple forms, [as] first level of God’s understanding.
The second level, we saw, was the Definables. These were still simple, relatively simple notions. [Pause] How did it emerge from the preceding ones? I only have a possible answer: that it’s not the same infinity. The absolutely simple ones are the predicates of God, that is, of infinity through self. The Definables, the relatively simple ones, are something else. They refer to another infinity. What is the second infinity? I have told you ten thousand times that you will understand absolutely nothing about seventeenth century thought if you do not see that it’s a thought about orders of infinity. Whether it’s Pascal, or Spinoza, or Leibniz, that’s the problem of the seventeenth century – I don’t say it’s the only one – the distinction of orders of infinity. Definables, it’s not the same infinity. With what infinity do they connect? What is this infinity of the second order? It’s no longer what is infinite through self, but what is infinite through its cause, that is, that which is infinite only through the cause on which it depends, the infinite through its cause.
Here I think, I don’t want to attempt a justification. I say it like that, and it’s up to those of you interested in this aspect of Leibniz’s thought to reflect. I believe that corresponds exactly. What is infinity through its cause? It’s the series that is infinite to the extent that all its terms enter into infinity in its rapports of the whole and parts. The infinite through its cause gets its status in series that enter into infinity in its whole-parts rapports. So that would correspond to the first series, the series of extensities. [Pause] And then there are notions even relatively simpler. These are no long Definables, these are requisites or limits, requisites or limits. There you have the three great regions of God’s understanding. And what is it? It links to a third sort of infinity. And what is it this time? It’s the infinite of convergent series tending toward limits.
With that distinction, we have a firm basis. The list doesn’t stop there, we will see, but that will be at the very end of our work. We will see that there are a lot more infinities. Those are the first three in Leibniz. He refines the orders of infinity. In Leibniz, there are three, the first three orders of infinity.[10] Very good, everything is great, for I would remind you, it’s up to you to compare, the famous letter seven of Spinoza, the letter to Louis Meyer on infinity, in which Spinoza distinguishes three infinities, three orders of infinity.[11] How do you want to understand anything at all in Pascal if — as I assume he’s an author you like — and in any of Pascal’s developments on infinities, if you don’t resituate [yourselves] a little into such beautiful and such comparable texts?
– I feel that I am going to have a dizzy spell. I hesitate between a Cartesian reaction, a paranoid reaction, [Laughter] and a schizophrenic reaction of flight. If there weren’t any bars (barreaux)… —[12]
That’s the point we have reached on a certain level, in which even the idea – I am picking this up again — of history, object, subject has no sense. I cannot locate them; it’s as if you told me: in a particular level of the earth, can you locate a particular pebble? I would say, that depends, that depends on the nature of the pebble. At the level where we find ourselves, object, subject, history, including painting, etc., and I would say even sounds and colors, have absolutely no sense. If I invoke sound and color, it’s by analogy, to offer an idea of this story of chaos. It’s not that you understand poorly, it’s just that you want to place everything on the same level. It’s troubling for any philosophy, but it’s particularly troubling for Leibniz’s philosophy that operates through very well determined levels.
At the point we’ve reached, as you said quite well, how does one get out of chaos to arrive at the event? We did so with nothing other than the idea of chaos, two kinds of series, the conjunction of these series that constitute the event. That’s all. It’s packed (bourré). By “packed”, I understand something precise, just as one says of a painting, of a drawing, it’s packed. If you add something to it, it’s ruined (foutu). You have paintings that include enormous empty spaces, [and] if you fill a tiny bit of this empty space, the painting is ruined! I would say that, however great the empty spaces might be, it’s packed. So, one must expect all this, it’s a very beautiful story, in the general sense. We have reached the event, but we aren’t going to stop there. I have already announced what the event is composed of, and that’s a whole new problem.
What are the elements of events? With that, we shall see new notions emerge. What is a weak philosophy? It’s a philosophy with a weak content (teneur) of concepts. It has two or three concepts, and it crushes all of them at the same level. But in a rich philosophy like Leibniz’s, there is an entire system of concepts that emerge at their moment. It’s just that you go too fast. It’s not that you are misunderstanding things, but that you are going too fast. Be satisfied with the level where we are at. If you say subject or object, I will tell you, careful, we are not there. These are words that cannot have any sense at that level. We are in the process of engendering the event as a drop of reality. There is no place for the rest. And history even more so, there is no place for history. Will there ever be such a place? Of course. There will be everything that you want. And we are even going to see it. In other words, this doesn’t stop at the event. So, my plea is this: everything that you said, on the contrary, shows that you have understood very well. But having understood well, why are you in such a hurry? There are moments when one has to be fast, and then there are moments where one has to be very, very slow in thought. There are moments in which it takes off in a rush, and then there are moments when it drags extraordinarily. I can’t say that the moments when it drags aren’t the richest, or that it’s the moments where it all takes off at top speed. In any case, a thought has rhythms in a strange way; it’s like music, you have very, very different, very variable tempos. So if you demand that notions from level four already be on level one, you are going to confuse everything, however strong or clever you might be; you will confuse everything.
Question/intervention from Georges Comtesse: (On the relation of Leibniz and Descartes).[13]
Deleuze: I am going to tell you, Comtesse… [Laughter] — They notice my reaction to what you are saying. — So, that comes down to saying, and I am quite sure, that if you did a course on the same subject, you would do it entirely differently. What I am discussing is the little expression that you slid in: “That would be deeper.” The differences between you and me, it’s that you would insist, if I understood well, on a certain affinity between Leibniz and Descartes. I am quite aware that it’s possible and legitimate. But for me, I insist on a radical opposition that’s equally possible and equally legitimate. We have already had, it seems to me, we must have already had the same problem in the past, with Spinoza, [that] we can do both. When you say: for me, it’s a bit deeper, there I can get vexed because I don’t see why it would be deeper, one more than the other. I prefer to say, with a great affection, that it’s equally deep, or it’s equally superficial.
But there we are: I do not at all say that you are wrong; it happens that for me, such as I have approached things, and by privileging – I am quite aware that I privilege this or that problem in Leibniz, and that you would privilege others to support your viewpoint, and other texts that you would have for yourself – I don’t put any of that into question. I say that in my schema — and besides, most of you have already understood this – I deny that Leibniz and even Spinoza belong – as you say – within the same fold as Descartes. For me, and it’s my sole bit of cleverness (malice), it’s to see that Descartes is a man of the Renaissance and not a Classic, and that he still belongs to the Renaissance. What you have revealed in your brief intervention is that, no, there is a means and a possibility of making of Descartes not only a Classic, but in the end, the father of Leibniz and Spinoza. In one sense, that would be very interesting, but that does not occur at the level of a discussion. You would need to have an occasion to do an entire course on this, and myself as well, and we would no doubt realize that certain listeners would favor your side, and certain listeners would favor mine depending on their affinity with problems that would have been stated at the start. But, in any event, what you have just said and outlined is obviously an absolutely different schema from mine.
For me, Descartes does not belong to this Classical world that I am trying to define, once it’s stated that this Classical world that I am trying to define is the Baroque world, for me, whereas for you, without doubt, what you call the Classical world would not be the Baroque world. It would be a world capable of including Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz. But I want to say, I am just saying, it’s not with the same texts that you would obtain your own interpretation. It’s not with the same texts. And I have always said and I repeat it to you, and this takes on an even more immediate sense with Comtesse’s intervention, I do not pretend that my interpretation is the only one possible; do I pretend that it’s the best? Obviously, otherwise I wouldn’t propose it, but I say that to myself very softly, and also while blushing with the shame that I feel, so I wouldn’t ever say it publicly. So I say: everything is good, everything is good provided that you make yourself your own judge, that is, you yourself are going to verify [this] in the texts.
So, allow me just to say, before returning to this final point, it’s a third infinity. We had the infinity through self, the infinity through a cause that referred, it seems, to extensions in so far as they constituted rapports of whole and parts to infinity, and then there we have the infinite series tending toward a limit, and that’s the third infinity. If I refer to Spinoza’s famous letter on the three infinities, the first two coincide. It’s the infinity through self, specifically God and what Spinoza calls his attributes, God and his attributes. [Pause] Second point, second infinity, Spinoza calls it infinity through its cause. Plus a third infinity that Spinoza distinguishes. Look at this letter that is quite beautiful. Notice that we have annotations by Leibniz on this letter from Spinoza in which Leibniz, who is however stingy about compliments and who is wary of Spinoza like the plague, — since Leibniz’s problem is especially that [he] not be taken for a philosopher of immanence; “I am a good Christian, I am orthodox”; Spinoza is the enemy to a point that Leibniz has played some damnable tricks (tours pendables) on Spinoza. Fortunately Spinoza remained indifferent. Leibniz has never been very clear. — And there you have Leibniz, despite his reticence, bursting with written compliments. About Spinoza’s third infinity, he says that Spinoza perceives something quite profound. And as it’s a mathematical infinity, and as Spinoza is notoriously not a great mathematician, while nonetheless being an excellent physicist and very, very talented optician, but he’s not a great mathematician, such mathematical compliments coming from Leibniz are very interesting.
How does Spinoza define the third infinity? He tells us that there are quantities that, although they are contained in finite limits, exceed any number. He himself gives a geometric example that does not seem to go in the direction of infinite convergent series. So I uniquely pose the question with a question mark: would Spinoza’s third infinity not be the same as Leibniz’s third infinity? But I conclude: nothing prevents them from resembling each other considerably, since in one case it’s an infinity of convergent series tending toward a limit, while in the other case it’s an infinity contained in the limits of space. I think that the conversion of one into the other is possible, even mathematically. So there would be a great interest in confronting Leibniz’s three infinities with Spinoza’s three infinities.
But, you see, I can just say, there are three sorts of simple notions in Leibniz, and with this, we rediscover to a certain extent something that we found from the start, from the previous terms (trimestres), I believe. We will leave aside absolutely simple notions since they only concern God, God itself, as we have seen; the relatively simple notions that concern the rapports whole-parts, the extensions; and the limits converging toward a limit that concerns intensions, intensities. I say that the last two, the last two sorts of simple notions refer precisely or somewhat precisely to the two types of series of Whitehead, the series divisible to infinity, without limit, and the series converging onto a limit. So the conjunction of these last two series gives us the event or the actual occasion. What is an event? What’s so surprising? Well, nothing. If you recall the first term (trimestre), this was something we established (acquis): What Whitehead as the twentieth-century physicist that he was called vibration, that’s it almost exactly, and there, from the viewpoint of the concept, I see no difference; from the viewpoint of the scientific enrichment (approfondissement) of the notion, there are great differences. It’s exactly what Leibniz, as great seventeenth-century mathematician, called an inflection. So, if you recall, our entire first term consisted of commenting on what an inflection was, and we knew ahead of time that an event was a conjunction of inflections. So we are achieving here the firmest fusion, if I dare say, with our work during the first term.
At this point, a new curtain lifts since we have reached the event. You recall what the event is: I am crushed by a bus, but it’s also the life of the Great Pyramid over ten minutes. Any passage of Nature is event, that is, any development of series. We will call it the passage of Nature, [or] if you prefer, passage of God, it’s the same. I am crushed by a bus, it’s God passing! [Laughter] I look at the Great Pyramid for ten minutes, and there again, it’s God’s passage, or a passage of Nature. It’s an event. Once more, what an event is, you will understand nothing if you translate it as: an event is the Great Pyramid has been constructed. It’s not about that. The construction of the Great Pyramid is another event. But the life of the pyramid during the ten minutes that I am looking at it is an event, and the life of the pyramid during the following ten minutes is another event. You will tell me: but during the five minutes included within the ten minutes, well yes, that’s indeed the divisibility to infinity. It’s even the first series, the infinite series that re-enters into rapports of whole and parts. I would say: the life of the pyramid during the five minutes is a part of the life over ten minutes. So everything is fine.
[Interruption by several students] Open the door, please, and ask those who are waiting there, what are you waiting for? [Different answers: A truck… They are waiting on another course… Like the last time…] Euh, please be so good as to ask them… They really don’t seem very lively. [Laughter] Ask them calmly, what they are waiting for and if they are waiting for this classroom…. No? So, if you dare, you could tell them to step back a bit, if you dare, without angering them, right? [Laughter] They’re going to get mean. [Laughter; pause] No, no, it doesn’t matter. I think it would be better to back off. [Laughter] This isn’t getting better, but I saw a girl there who had a particularly dark and nasty look, so I’m telling myself… [Laughter] we had better not… There’s a reason why and there’s a reason why not. So, fine, this works out well right now, a new scene, a new session.
What is an event composed of? For the moment I have nothing that composes an event. I have the conditions of an event, but what composes an event? [Pause] What is an event made of? And I propose to you the same method, despite it being very artificial: Whitehead’s answer, and Leibniz’s answer. [Pause] For this, you find Whitehead’s analysis in Process and Reality. And he’s going to tell us… [Deleuze peruses in the text] one, two, three, four, five, it varies. He says, first general answer: the component element of the event, that is, of the actual occasion is prehension.[14] Prehension. This will be Whitehead’s fundamental concept. You understand very well, this answer would be very disappointing if I didn’t immediately correct it: prehension never ceases prehending other prehensions. In other words, the event is not a prehension, because at that point, it would only be a synonym of event, and it wouldn’t be a component. We have to say, in Whitehead’s language, that the event is a nexus of prehensions, in the plural. You see that there are two definitions of the event or the actual occasion. I can say that it’s a concrescence of series, or I can say it’s a nexus of prehensions. A concrescence of series means: placing into convergence or conjunction, that’s the concrescence. Or I can say: it’s a nexus of prehensions, that is, it’s prehensions that refer to each other.
What does Leibniz tell us? What is the element of the event? The element of the event is the monad! And what is the monad? You know, it’s a prehension of the world, what Leibniz translates as: every monad expresses the world. It prehends the world. Nexus of prehension means what? What are the elements going to be? He distinguishes five of them. Every prehension has five aspects. And as every prehension is a prehension of prehensions, you sense that each aspect of a prehension is going to intersect with other aspects of another prehension. Each prehension presents a prehending subject. Intervening here is the notion: the first appearance of the subject. A datum, a Latin word always popular in philosophy, that is, a given, a datum or a prehended given. What is a datum or a prehended given? It’s another prehension pre-existing the prehension I am considering. Every prehension presupposes previously existing prehensions. A prehension, one or several previously existing prehensions will be the data of the actual prehension, that is, the data of the prehending subject. In other words, every event is prehension of preceding events. Note what the datum is, the prehended datum is. I would say: at my concert this evening Stravinsky will be performed in one manner or another; this prehension of the performed Stravinsky piece will prehend data, previously existing givens, specifically, a certain number of performances of the same piece.
Notice that already, at this level, I have operations of repulsion. There are negative prehensions. By negative prehensions, we will call these prehensions that, in an actual event, reject certain preceding events. For example, if I am an orchestra conductor, there will be a negative prehension to a certain execution of Stravinsky that is being performed that evening with a particular kind of execution that I know well and that I cannot stand, no, especially not that! My prehension that evening will imply the negative prehension of a datum, that is, of a pre-existing prehension in the mode of repulsion, of exclusion. I would not take it into my prehension. We have all been there; these are fundamental choices we make. There are philosophers that we just cannot take within our prehension because we would vomit them out. Not in the case of philosophers because philosophy is so full of harmony! [Laughter] But in the domain of human passions, there are these phenomena of prehensions through vomiting or vomitive prehensions. Fine, I’d like to go quickly.
These prehended data, these prehended data that are pre-existing prehensions, they form the public material of my actual prehension, public. Whitehead really liked this word, “public.” He speaks of the public dimension of a prehension, in distinction to its private dimension. It’s odd, in philosophy, this use of public and private at that level. Pre-existing events that are themselves prehensions, but that I apprehend in my actual prehension, are the public dimension of the prehension. Very strange, especially that, yet again, there is a private dimension of prehension. You see that every actual prehension has data, so there is a prehending subject, — the subject is nothing other for the moment than the act of prehension — there is prehended data that are old prehensions and that form the public [aspect] of prehension. It’s lovely.
Third component: what he calls the subjective form. The subjective form is the “how”? How does my actual prehension prehend the givens? It’s what he calls: how my actual prehension prehends the given, the old prehensions, that is, you see immediately, in the mode of exclusion, the vomiting, or in the mode of integration, but what type of integration? That can be the project, that can be the evaluation, that can be agony, that can be desire, that can be just anything. He will call that the subjective form or the how of prehension, the manner in which prehension prehends the prehended, that is, the datum; he will call it the “feeling”. The subjective form is the “feeling”, what Isabelle Stengers proposed to translate the last time by “affect”. [Pause]
Fourth dimension, rather odd, because it is hardly French, that precisely we always discover our problem that we cannot get rid of: but my God, my God, why not revert to the attempt that only Nietzsche was capable of? Obviously, why not? Because one would require the same talent as Nietzsche, otherwise it would be lamentable. Why not undertake a national-tarian study (étude nationalitaire) of philosophy? Why not say: so that’s what is English in philosophy, that’s what is German, that’s what is French, that’s what is Greek, instead of attributing everything to the Greeks? In Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche was able to do it once, and what he was able to do once, he was able to do it notably for the Germans both in the funniest way and in the most philosophical manner of all. And precisely, and this is good case of the help that Beyond Good and Evil brought me and caused me to re-read a passage within it on the German soul. And this admirable text that is generally this, I summarize it rapidly. He says, Germans consider themselves deep and other people have followed this, and they speak generally of the depth of the German soul. And you know, says Nietzsche, the German soul is not deep, but it’s your choice: it’s better or much less good, it’s a lot more or a lot less. It’s not that the German soul is deep, but that it is so multiple, it’s full of folds and pleats. And clearly, this texts appeals to me. This text appeals to me. To the extent that we have defined the entry of Germany onto the philosophical scene through Leibniz, under the form of a Baroque philosophy that operated by folds and pleats, it’s good, it’s pleasing to find this confirmation: the German soul is full of folds and pleats. One had to wait for Hegel to deny it. Hegel said, no, no, we are deep. At that point, all is lost, all is perhaps lost.
Fine, I was saying that because in the direction of what is English in philosophy, but I am going to tell you, but I’m taking risks because… Nietzsche missed what is English in philosophy because he detested the Utilitarians. He didn’t see that the Utilitarians were crazy; I don’t think he read the Utilitarians. His criticisms of them are weak in the long run. These pages are not good, the pages on the English. I think this is a shame because he didn’t see how the English were. The same goes for the madness of a people and their philosophy, the same thing. What is properly English, I will tell you. It’s the notion that emerges in fourth place, with Whitehead, the notion, I’ll say it with my accent, the notion of “self-enjoyment”. [Laughter] How do we translate that? It’s not possible. “Enjoy”? The en-joy-ment of self ! (L’enjoiement de soi !) Why do I translate this in such a grotesque way? You understand well that if I translate it by self-contentment, in French, it’s zero, it’s contradictory (c’est un contre-sens). Why? I always tell you that a philosophical concept is seeking the violent encounter of the flattest, the most banal, and the paradox personified (en personne). To take the flattest, and tell yourself, look at what [sort of] paradox there is here. I say the flattest, but I believe, I asked some competent people, it’s a very popular expression among the English, “Enjoy yourself.” At the extreme, we say that to a child to tell him/her: have fun (amuse-toi). It’s the equivalent of our “have fun”. I say to a little guy, go play, “enjoy yourself”, go have fun. But the beggar at the rich man’s house, when he received a handout, or the philosopher when he knocks at the rich man’s door to assure him of a happy death, [Laughter] they leave the house saying: “enjoy yourself”. And why? Because you sense that the expression is extremely biblical, and that, you certainly are aware that for the English, the Bible is not a holy book, or isn’t merely a holy book. It’s the book of all and of nothing. It’s the book of all wisdom and of all popular wisdom. “Enjoy yourself!” Take delight! (Rejouissez-vous !).
There you have an element of the event, self-enjoyment, that is, the prehender (le préhendant). I am translating there, at the point we have reached. Sense that we have no choice, we have no choice: the prehender can only prehend the givens by taking delight and rejoicing. Hence my question: what is this “self-enjoyment”? Is it really a typically English concept? Let’s reflect on this a bit. Whitehead’s pages are sublime; they are sublime on “self-enjoyment” which is a philosophical category. In my view, if the French ignore such a philosophical category, the French are so riddled by the opposite, by self-melancholy. [Laughter] The French are so depressed that “self-enjoyment”, that? No way. What [the French] know is the absence of being (le manque à être) which is dying.
I am not saying that English philosophy is reduced only to that [concept]. For those who are a bit familiar with it, what does [English philosophy] consist of? It consists of a sublime encounter: the encounter of the most demanding empiricism and the subtlest neo-Platonism. The most typical representative of this is one of the world’s greatest poets, who today still has a great name, but I have to work to recall it, but you know it well… Well, the field of the former Marat [Pause; we hear a student suggest a name to Deleuze] Coleridge! That’s it! Coleridge who is  not only an immense poet, but a very, very great philosopher, and who created this junction between empirical requirements and a neo-Platonic tradition, a tradition of neo-Platonic mysteries that is entirely curious. Why do I invoke the neo-Platonists? Because the neo-Platonists were almost – how do I say this? – almost the English of this beautiful era. Byzantium is a kind of England… why? They had a very great idea. In Plotinus’s third Ennead, you have an idea that belongs… We can always play this game: what are the twelve separate pages that seem to you the most beautiful in the world? One plays it well with films. For me, I would immediately place this page of Plotinus among the ten most beautiful in the world. It’s a page in the third Ennead — Plotinus’s books are grouped in Enneads — a page from the third Ennead on contemplation.
Here is precisely what Plotinus tells us: everything rejoices, everything rejoices in itself, and it rejoices in itself because it contemplates the other. Every thing is a contemplation, and it’s from this that joy results. That is, joy is fulfilled contemplation. It rejoices in itself to the extent that its contemplation is fulfilled. And of course, it’s not itself that it contemplates. By contemplating something else, it is fulfilled itself. The thing is fulfilled in itself by contemplating the other thing. And he says: not only animals, not only souls, [but] you and me, we are contemplations fulfilled by themselves. We are tiny joys, but we no longer know it! Sense that these are the words of salvation of philosophy. It’s the philosopher’s profession of faith, and that does not mean: I am happy. What stupidities have been said about Leibniz’s optimism; that does not at all mean everything is fine! When someone tells you, like Plotinus: be joyful, that does not mean: go on, kids, you’ll see, everything is fine, be joyful, contemplate and fulfill yourself with what you contemplate. Then you will be completely joyful. And he says: not only you and me, [but] our souls are contemplations, but animals are contemplations, and plants are contemplations, and rocks are themselves contemplations. There is a “self-enjoyment” of the rock. By the very fact that it contemplates, it fulfills itself with what it contemplates. It fulfills itself with what it contemplates and through this, it is “self-enjoyment”. And here, he finishes splendidly, it’s a text of such beauty, he ends it splendidly; and I will be told that I am joking in saying all this, but perhaps jokes themselves are contemplations. It’s a splendid text, look at it!
What does he mean? One gazes very well into the neo-Platonist system. Each being, at its level, turns back toward that from which it proceeds. That’s what contemplation is. Contemplation is conversion; it’s the conversion of a soul or a thing toward that from which it proceeds. By turning back toward that from which it proceeds, the soul contemplates. In contemplating it fulfills itself. But it does not fulfill itself from the other, that from which it proceeds – or of the image of the other from which it proceeds – without fulfilling itself with self. It becomes joy of itself by turning back toward that from which it proceeds. “Self-enjoyment”, the joy of self, is the correlative of the contemplation of principles. There you have a great neo-Platonist idea. Imagine an empiricist, and an empiricist who has read the Bible, that is, an Englishman, [Laughter] and who reads this text by Plotinus, and who sees that Plotinus says: even animals, even plants, even rocks are contemplations. He will say: I knew it. I knew it. And isn’t it what the Bible tells us when it tells us that the lilies and flowers sing the glory of God? The lilies and flowers sing the glory of God, what could that mean? Is it a poetic expression? But no. Each thing is a contemplation of that from which it proceeds.
But here we are on the empirical terrain, and that will change nothing. But we can make some progress. It’s getting easier and easier to understand what Plotinus means, in any case. What does that mean, each thing contemplates that from which it proceeds? Well, yes, you have to imagine that a rock contemplates… Darn, (Zut) I’m again going to be out of examples, so this won’t be very convincing. The rock contemplates, silicon, surely carbon, x, y, z, etc. … from which it proceeds. Wheat sings the glory of the heavens, that means that wheat is contemplation of the elements from which it proceeds, and that it borrows from the earth, and that it borrows from the earth according to its proper form, and according to the requirements of its form, that is, according to its “feeling.” The requirements of its form are “feeling.” And a living body, a living body contemplates, me, my living body, my organism, not me, it’s for this that they will slide into a vitalism; empiricists will slide into a vitalism that is a marvel of the world. Understand? An organic body, but it contemplates, carbon, nitrogen, water, salts from which it proceeds. Let us translate in terms that are known to you: each thing is contemplation of its own requisites. Instead of invoking the great neo-Platonist principles, we invoke the conditions of existence: each thing is unconscious contemplation of its own conditions of existence, that is, of its requisites. Good, little by little, we advance.
You sense what that means, to contemplate! Obviously it’s not a theoretical activity. Once again, it’s a flower, much more than the philosopher, that contemplates. The cow, contemplations, the cow, there you are. What is there that’s more contemplative than a cow? [Laughter] It seems to look out into emptiness, but not at all. [Laughter] It’s true, there are animals that are absolutely not contemplative at all, but this is the lowest level of animals, for example cats and dogs, that contemplate very, very little. [Laughter] And they know very little joy. These are bitter animals, [Laughter] and they contemplate nothing. [Laughter] They link directly to the damned; we will see that the damned contemplate nothing, we have seen it. [Laughter] The status of the damned is that these are pure vomitives. They are nothing other than negative prehensions. They have only negative and expulsive prehensions, since they are only vomitives in a pure state. [Laughter] Cats and dogs are vomitives in a pure state. Also all the damned are escorted by a cat and a dog, [Laughter] as conclusion, because there are currently more cats and dogs than the damned. At the time of Leibniz, things must have been more reasonable, there were a lot fewer. But cows? Cows are eminently contemplative, and what do they contemplate? Not stupidities (bêtises). They contemplate the elements from which they emerged, they contemplate their own requisite, and the requisite of the cow, is grass! But what does contemplating mean? With grass, that is, with grass they create flesh, cow flesh. You will tell me that for a cat and dog, we need to discuss this. It’s well known that a cat’s flesh is not very tasty. As people say, it’s tasteless (fade). For dogs, it’s the same. They are all-purpose food. For the Chinese, they call this meat just anything.[15]
Question : And God ?
Deleuze: That’s a very important question, but this we will see.  With this, there is no difficulty because God being infinite in itself, it has plenty to contemplate. Auto-contemplation and “self-enjoyment” of God is properly infinite, by definition. If you read… Don’t take the example of cats and dogs, it’s not very illuminating. Understand, at least, what it means to contemplate. It’s here as well that we are fully within a philosophical concept. In this, Whitehead was right when he renounced contemplating. Contemplating already existed quite fully, in the work of a great English author and predecessor of Whitehead, [Samuel] Butler. In a very, very brilliant book entitled Life and Habit, Butler explained that all beings are habits, habituses, and these are also full of philosophical concepts, and the habitus was contemplation. And in some very lovely pages, he stated that wheat was contemplation of its own elements, elements from which it emerged, and through that, it was habitus, even full, says Butler, a very beautiful thing, of a “joyous and naïve confidence in the self”. Sense that in Lawrence, the extent to which all this is English – in Lawrence, in great pages on nature, you will find similar things.[16] If you consider this affectation, you are missing everything. It’s one of the most power thoughts, I believe, of a kind of pantheism. This conception of nature is astonishing. They are not playing at being idiots; they lived nature in this way, as organisms that fulfill themselves, in what? Contemplating? No!
Once again, Isabelle [Stengers] said it the last time, they propose…  Whitehead does not use the word “contemplate”; he uses the word “envisage”, it’s a tiny nuance. It’s to suppress the passive aspect. He means that there is prehension of requisites. The subject prehends its own requisites. One envisages one’s own requisites more than one contemplates them. And, in fact, it’s not a pure contemplation; it’s not an abstract contemplation, so Whitehead is afraid that the word contemplate… I prefer, on the contrary, the word contemplate, because risking the misunderstanding matters little, but [the word] is more powerful (chargé), more risky.
But why isn’t it a passive contemplation? Because, literally, we could find a word for it, the name of an active operation. In fact, it’s a contraction, a contraction. If I say that, everything becomes clear, it seems to me; if I say that an organism contracts the elements that it needs, if I say that your organism is a contraction of carbon, water, oxygen, salt, etc., it seems to me that this becomes extremely clear. If I say that a rock is a contraction of silicon and I don’t know what else, that becomes very clear. So if I say, while generalizing, every prehension prehends its givens, prehends the data, that is, the past prehensions since, in fact, the silicon itself is prehension, carbon itself is prehension. These are prehensions assumed by the living. Prehension never prehends anything except prehensions. I’d say that nitrogen, carbon, oxygen are “public” materials of the living. Thus, prehending is always contracting past prehensions; it’s contracting data. And in contracting the data, I fulfill myself with the joy of being myself. [Here ends the Web Deleuze transcript] And it is absolutely not joy of the kind “how fine and handsome you are”, which is nothing other than subjective “feeling” in a pure state, that is, the naïve confidence that this is going to endure.
What is living if not precisely this “enjoyment”? And however melancholic you pretend to be, [Laughter] and however awful you feel in the morning, and however depressed when you got up, you can’t suppress this little “enjoyment”. Why? Because what is this? It’s the small confidence that this is going to continue, that is, I mean, that your heart is not going to stop at this moment. What is agony? Agony is any interruption of the continuous process of “self-enjoyment”. What is there that’s so agonizing in a not terribly dangerous phenomenon like tachycardia? It’s that tachycardia gives us the impression that it’s not going to last, that the heart is going to stop. But, we cannot live with the idea that the heart is going to stop. Never has a cardiac sufferer lived with the idea that his heart was going to stop; otherwise, one must go urgently to the hospital so that he might be able to stand this suspicion. Living is always having this confidence in what ever state you might be. There is absolutely no point in being surprised that someone dying still has this confidence. There is no point making up words to say, that one must speak the truth or not speak the truth, all that. These appear to me to be false problems par excellence. This is not at all the question. The question is that each person might save this small confidence, that it’s not going to stop in the next moment, and the rest will take care of itself.
It’s maintaining this kind of “self-enjoyment” that is indeed something else, as we will see later. Leibniz speaks of it in his own way; we have indeed seen that. We can feel [“self-enjoyment”], but in the depth of pain, the worst of pains. Grant me that in the worst pains, you have not doubted that this was going to continue. I am not talking about the pain, but that your heart was going to continue its contractions, that your heart was going to continue to contract. Contract what? Blood, to prehend the blood that arrives. The heart is a prehension; the heart is a subject. Each of your organs, whether internal or external, is a subject that prehends, and that prehends what? That prehends other prehensions to infinity, and it has a “feeling”, henceforth, insofar as it prehends, that it has a “how”, a manner of prehending of what it prehends. And insofar as it has a “feeling”, this “feeling” fills itself in the form of a small joy of existing, the “self-enjoyment”. Well, so, I am not at all saying, no more than Leibniz, that the world is marvelous. I am saying that if we don’t reach this entirely simple dimension of the living being, we can always create a philosophy of melancholy, but there are always people to say that this doesn’t concern me. And well, there we are, you understand?
So, I would say [that] “self-enjoyment”, and already even “feeling”, is on the contrary the private form of prehension, and it’s in a sense of something that cannot be restrained. For myself, I can freely remove it from myself through suicide if I judge that suicide is indispensable. But no misfortune, no danger, to some extent, no illness can remove it from me since it’s only the calm confidence that this continues, but not forever. How do you expect my heart to beat without believing that it’s going on indefinitely? If my heart believed itself to be beating for a limited duration, it would immediately stop. My heart is a prehending subject. And me, what am I? I am a conglomerate of prehending subjects. I am a nexus of prehensions, and it is all these prehensions that have some “self-enjoyment”.

Lecture 14, 7 April 1987: Logic of the Event
What remains for us to do in order to finish up – we already did the first part of three; it’s been a long time since we finished that; it was a mighty effort – and then we are reaching the end of the second part which, generally, we might call a theory of the spiritual event (événement spirituel). [Pause] Then, the third part remains for us to complete. I am saying all this so that you see what I have left to do, and there’s no reason that this should stop before we’ve finished. We will stop when we are done.
What remains to be done in this second part is to situate ourselves fully in this theory of the event as spiritual event thanks to this comparison that we began, Whitehead-Leibniz. And it seems to me that this is something quite important, not for philosophy in general, but for the possibilities of philosophy, that this rather unusual vision of the event opens to us based on everything, everything, everything being event, as if [it were], according to the philosopher’s choice, always a legitimate choice, the concept of an opening (exposé) onto such an unusual notion. I mean [that] we all think we know how to create an event, but it’s rare to find people who think that the world is made of events. And yet, something connects in our mind when we are told, for example, what is an electron? However little we might know of the sciences, we are asked, what is an electron? What do you think an electron is made of? Do you take it to be a thing or an event? Might one say in fact, provided we verify this ourselves, that everything is an event?
But if there are only events, then what do you take yourself to be? Do you take yourself to be persons? There are people who take themselves to be persons, which is entirely legitimate, for you and me, to want to settle back into beliefs that certainly fortify us in life. But, do you take yourselves to be persons or events? You’ll tell me, we are so modest that we don’t take ourselves to be events. But there exist some very small events; there are miniscule events. Literally, an event isn’t an event. There’s nothing there to create an event! [Laughter] So where is the greater arrogance, to take oneself to be a person or to take oneself to be an event? So, we have all this.
And then, we must draw some conclusions, and still remaining in this second part, I am going to say immediately why, about the substance, that it’s a philosophical problem and one that has traversed philosophy for a long time. And after all, why would anyone think that this would be a finished notion? And even if it were a notion that’s done and completed, that no longer refers to anything but the history of philosophy, we must still establish why. Or else, is there a way to conserve it? We still need it today; everything isn’t finished! And so, as I was finally straddling the two subjects, I had said that we would take advantage of the end of this second part to draw some conclusions about what philosophy might indeed be, and what doing philosophy might be, or what it means, taking our yearlong work as an example, what it means to reflect on Leibniz today. What does… Fine, this is what we have left to do.
And then, and then, in order for us to finish the year, there remains for us something that we have never discussed, and I want to tell you immediately so that you understand the overview of what we have done. I am saying that all we have seen during this term is the event as spiritual event. What does that mean? [Here begins the Web Deleuze transcript] In one sense, every event is spiritual; moreover, something is an event only insofar as carried to the state of phenomenon of the spirit. Death is an event only as a phenomenon of the spirit, or if not, a birth is an event, etc. But in the end, we have seen how, in Leibniz, the event referred to inherence in the monad, that is, the event has actual existence only in the monad that expresses the world, only in the monad that expresses the world. The event exists actually in the monad, in each monad.
But this is only one dimension of the event, it’s the spiritual dimension. The event still has to be realized (s’effectue). Here I would distinguish actualizing and realizing. I would say that the event is realized in a spirit, and that constitutes the most profound belonging of the spirit to the event and of the event to the spirit. The event actualizes itself in a spirit or, if you prefer, a soul. There are souls everywhere. That would very much be in conformity with Leibniz: the event actualizes itself in a soul and there are souls everywhere, but at the same time, the event must be realized (s’effectue), must be realized in a matter, must be realized in a body. With this, we have something like a double system of coordinates: the actualization of a soul and the realization of a body.
But what does it mean, having a body, since, precisely, during this whole term, we have devoted it to the relations between the event and the monad as pure spirit, as soul?[2] And we do sense, yet again, that the event so defined, as what exists actually in the soul, implies another dimension: to realize oneself in a matter or in a body. Hence our question, and the question as the departure point for our third part will be: what does it mean to have a body? What is this about? We will be aware what having a body means, or at least the body itself: it’s this in which the event is realized. Crossing the Rubicon — the eternal example to which Leibniz returns — crossing the Rubicon is the actual event, rather it’s the event that actualizes itself in the monad Caesar, and in fact, it requires a decision of the soul. Caesar could have not crossed the Rubicon; we have seen in what sense there was freedom for Leibniz. But that also refers to a body and a river; it is necessary that this body cross this river, that monads have bodies, moreover that these bodies be located in a material world. This aspect we have not at all considered and this will be the aim of the third part.
 
But I therefore return in this way to the end of the second part that I would like to move forward today as much as possible. My dream would be to complete it, but I understand our path, which is: what is this entire logic of the event that we have tried to construct over so many meetings?
We started off from this, something that has crisscrossed our entire term, specifically: Leibniz invents or adheres to an inclusion of the predicate in the subject. Only we have to be very careful since what he calls predicate is always a rapport or an event. I am basing myself very strongly on the text Discourse on Metaphysics where, as if for him all of this goes in passing so much without saying. Leibniz says: the predicate or event. Here we have something that, to my knowledge, neither Malebranche, nor Spinoza, nor Descartes would have ever said or even conceived of: the predicate or event. In other words, I am saying, be very careful because, on the contrary, and here we were forced to say this: no, there is something that doesn’t work in many commentaries on Leibniz, since they act as if the predicate in Leibniz was an attribute, as was the case for everyone else.
And we even see an author as equally important, as brilliant as [Bertrand] Russell who devotes a book to Leibniz,[3] and says: the inherence of the predicate in the subject implies that all judgment is a judgment of attribution. Henceforth, how is Leibniz going to account for the rapport, the relation? I am saying: there is something frightening in this, it seems to me, since Leibniz certainly confronts difficult problems, but not that one, for a simple reason: it’s that – of course, and this explains why he often talks about attribution in the same sense as about predication, but never, never, never, to my knowledge, at least I hope not, knock on wood, almost never will you find an identification between the predicate and the attribute. Why? — For a simple reason: that there is no attribute for Leibniz. It’s a good reason. So, of course, one can locate the word, but that doesn’t change anything. I mean: the predicate is always event or rapport.
I myself have no sense that the problems of relation cause the least difficulty for Leibniz; his entire philosophy is created for that. His entire logic is created for that. It would nonetheless be astounding if that were to cause him a particular problem. So it’s very strange since, you see, in my view, it’s even funny, the source of mistakes is always funny – and if I am right to think that it’s a mistake. When a man like Russell says: in Leibniz, judgments return to models of attribution, what does he base this on? On the formula: “The entire predicate is in the subject.” So he says that everything is attribution. But, “the entire predicate” implies, for Leibniz’s thought, that the predicate is not an attribute. So what is in the subject? What is in the subject is, in fact, rapports and events. In other words, Leibniz is an author for whom predication, [Pause] or if you prefer, assignment of a predicate to a subject, he’s an author for whom predication is distinguished radically from attribution. And he’s an author who, literally, at least at the extreme, would tell us: there is no attribution; there are only predications.
 
The question of the rapport and the relation, for Leibniz, has always been very simple; it consists of saying: there is a subject of the relation. You see those who say, those who object to Leibniz, like Russell, that a philosophy like Leibniz’s is incapable of taking account of relations; these are those peoole who understand or believe to understand: the relation has no subject. So a philosophy, such as Leibniz’s, which affirms that any judgment, any proposition is of the type “predicate is in the subject” cannot take account of the relation since the relation — when I say, for example, “there are three men” (voilà trois hommes), to take an example from Russell, “There are three men”, where is the subject? It’s a proposition without subject.
Fine, I believe that Leibniz’s answer would be extremely simple. Leibniz’s response would be: in all cases, whatever proposition that you might consider, what the subject is doesn’t go without saying. If you blunder in assigning the subject, it’s obviously a catastrophe. In “there are three men,” let’s look for what the subject is. [Pause] In the name of logic, you will agree with me that here I can consider the proposition “There are three men” as a proposition referring to the same function as “there are three apples” (voilà trois pommes); they have the same propositional function, there are three x. What is the subject of: “there are three x”?
Leibniz’s answer: if you pose the problem well, you will find the subject! Hence Russell’s reasoning according to which the subject is not this particular man, or another particular man, or an aggregate of three men. And everything depends on what the predicate is as well. We saw Leibniz’s answer, which is: it’s “there are three x”, the corresponding proposition is 2 + 1 are predicates of 3. That seems to be completely insignificant; 2 + 1 are predicates of 3. I tried to show that it was an extremely important answer since there is indeed assignment of a subject. And in Leibniz, this subject could only have as predicate a rapport; the rapport 2 + 1 is the predicate of the subject 3.Yet again, why say all this? It’s in order to say: the predicate is always a rapport or an event; it’s not an attribute. Predicate of the subject : this is a logic of the event.
My question immediately is: what results from this as regards substance? Because substance is the subject. In logic, what we call “subject” is what we call “substance” in metaphysics. Substance is defined as the subject of its own determinations. The two notions have been equivalent for a long time, and in the seventeenth century, there is a perfect equivalence between metaphysical substance and logical subject. It’s Kant and post-Kantian philosophy that create a difference to the extent that it will lead to a critique of the metaphysical subject, that is, a critique of substance, and henceforth will dissociate the destiny of the logical subject from substance itself. Were they correct? Everything depends on what kinds of problems they were posing at that moment. All this is not our business. I say: what are the consequences as regards substance? It’s essential. So there you have substance no longer defined and no longer to be defined by the attribute.
So, if you consider… I believe that from Aristotle to Descartes, of course in very different ways, substance is defined by the attribute, that is, what is the attribute here? The attribute is essence. The attribute is what the thing is, that is, its essence. And you have, if you will, conformity, correspondence between the logical schema “subject is attribute” and the metaphysical conformity “substance being essence.” If the proposition is no longer an attribution, that is, is no longer defined by the attribute of a subject, what becomes of a substance that can no longer be defined by an essence? It’s through this that the entire point reconnects with the most obvious and the most certain theme of our research this year. We will have to say that Leibniz breaks with the schema of attribution and that, at the same moment, he breaks with the essentialism of substance, of substance constituted by essence. [Pause] For attribution, he will substitute predication, the predicate always being rapport or event, and for essentialism, he will substitute what?
 
Well here, we can be quite delighted to have found the justification for a word that I will say very quickly: let’s call it Mannerism. For after all, we all know that Mannerism has very special rapports, either interior or a little prior to or a short while after, precisely with the Baroque. But we feel sorry for the critics who seem to suffer so much in defining Mannerism. [They] might as well change everything, location and place, and tell themselves: well fine, couldn’t philosophy give it a little help, since there is so much difficulty in defining Mannerism in art, and perhaps philosophy might give us a very simple means of defining Mannerism? And we sense that if substance is no longer defined by an essence, it’s going to be defined by what? In any case, a substance cannot be defined by its modes.[4]
 
What is the mode of a substance? What we call mode of a substance is something that implies substance without the substance implying it. For example, I say: the figure implies extension (l’étendue), or “the triangle implies extension,” the triangle implies extension. But extension does not imply the triangle. The proof is that it [extension] can have another figure, and even, at the extreme, it can have no figure at all. I would say: the figure is a mode of extent. You see? If a implies b without b implying a, then [Pause] there is a mode, so a is a mode of b. You see immediately how we distinguish in this way mode and essence. Essence is that which implies the thing of which it is the essence and which inversely is implied by the thing. In other words, we will say that essence is the reciprocal implication, and mode is the unilateral implication. It seemed very normal to define substance by essence, provided that there are essences.
What is Mannerism? Let’s assume, a thought; let’s define it as thought first, and then you have only to inquire within yourself and try while I am speaking, try to paint it within yourself. You unroll a mental canvas there, and you try to complete the corresponding painting. I am saying, imagine that a philosopher thinks, for undetermined reasons, that in the substance, there is more. There are not only modes, but there is something that is more than a mode or a modification, and that nonetheless is not an essence, is something other than an essence. It’s more than a modification and is not an essence; it’s something other than an essence. [Pause] Substance will no longer be defined by an essence. Go back to your mental canvas: I say that man is a reasonable animal. Paint the reasonable animal. That immediately gives you a style, a style of painting. Painting the reasonable animal is already a whole style of painting that constitutes some sublime paintings. [Pause] But if I say: no, of course, in substance there are things that are more than modes, but it’s not essences; these are things other than essences.
I refer to a text by Leibniz, the Letters to Father des Bosses (French edition, page 176): “You say that it seems to you” — Leibniz writes to the reverend father — “You say that it seems to you that there could be an intermediary being between substance and modification” — between substance and mode — “but I myself think that this intermediary is precisely to…” — I could read the rest, but we are not yet prepared to understand this — “is precisely to establish one’s substance (se substancier) one for self” — that is, the composed substance. That matters little; what matters is that he doesn’t say: this intermediary is an essence. I am saying, why aren’t we prepared to understand what he is going to explain in his letter to the reverend Father des Bosses? It’s because this belongs to our third part, and draws on material that we haven’t yet seen.
But what matters to me — it’s of little matter — from what he is trying to say there, I focus on: there’s an intermediary between modification and substance, and this intermediary is not at all determined as essence, which still is not an intermediary. So what is it, the intermediary between substance and modification? It can only be one thing, something that plays the role of a source of modifications, a source of modifications. Substance is not defined by an essence; it’s defined by and as the active source of its own modifications, [Pause] source of its own manners (manières). Substance has no essence; it’s the source of manners of being. A thing is defined by all the manners of being of which it is capable, the thing’s substance being the source of its manners of being. [Pause] Whether you like it or not, this implies that substance is inseparable from manners of being themselves. In other words, it [substance] cannot be separated from its modes except abstractly. [Pause] And if you insist on holding onto the word substance, you still can, but in that case, you will have to say: substance is everything.
And, in a text that seems quite important for us [Pause; Deleuze searches in his edition] from Discourse on Metaphysics (paragraph 15 [actually paragraph 16]), Leibniz tells us [Pause] something that seems so bizarre, we have to pay attention to it: “We could call our essence” — “on pourrait” [we could] in the conditional is already very interesting; that proves that he isn’t really all that committed to this notion — “We could call our essence that which encompasses all that we express” — and you recall, the monad expresses the whole world, the monad expresses the whole; he adds, he has a very special vocabulary, he has his reasons for this — “But what is limited in us” — so, we might call essence the whole of what we express, this would be our essence. Essence is the whole — “But what is limited in us” — And it’s what is limited in us, you remember perhaps? It’s the little region that we express clearly, that he calls so well our subdivision (département). We express the entire world, but we express clearly only a little region of the world — “But what is limited in us” — that is, our zone of clear expression — “what is limited in us will be called our nature or our power of action (puissance)”. It’s curious, he refuses the word essence. You see his operation: essence is the whole of what we express, and on the contrary, we will call nature or power of action, the limited zone that we express clearly. [Pause]
Let me sum up: at this level, substance can no longer be defined by essence. We will have to review that more closely, but it was my general theme. It can only be defined in relation to its own manner of being as the source of its manners. The Leibnizian monad is profoundly Mannerist and not essentialist. [Pause] I would almost say that it’s a revolution in the notion of substance, perhaps as great as the other revolution that will consist of doing without the notion of substance. Because what was important in the notion of substance? Was it the very idea of substance, or was it the fact of defining it by an essence? In Leibniz, it will no longer be defined by an essence; it appears in a Mannerist mode and no longer essentialist. And in fact, I believe that in a certain way, if you think of painting known as Mannerist, all of Leibniz’s philosophy is the Mannerist philosophy par excellence. [Pause] Already in Michelangelo, when we find traces there of an initial and profound Mannerism, you will see: an attitude of Michelangelo is not an essence. It’s really a source of a modification, the source of a manner of being. [Pause] In this sense, it’s perhaps philosophy that gives us for once the key to a problem of painting, under the form: what is Mannerism?
So, in any event, let’s go back [to our topic]. [Pause] In the end, what does this come down to saying? Why is there no essence? Once again for the same reasons that there are no attributes, but there are predicates. Predicates are events and rapports. Everything is event; that’s what Mannerism is. The production of a manner of being is event. The event is the production of a mode of being. “Everything is event” is the Mannerist vision of the world. There are only events. Fine.
Let’s go back to our very quick comparison. You saw, you recall, I hope… We had completed a first level, a first level as regards our confrontation at this level of a logic and a metaphysics of the event. Our Whitehead-Leibniz comparison had led us to develop a first level, specifically: [if] you take any event at all, once it’s said that everything is event, what are the conditions of the event? What are the conditions of the event? I remind you of the departure point valid as much for Leibniz as for Whitehead: an event is not simply, as Whitehead said, “a man gets run over”, but it’s “five minutes in the life of the Great Pyramid”. We were asking, what were the conditions of events? We could speak both languages, both languages being so close to each other. The event is vibratory and finds its condition in vibration. In the end, the final element of the event is the vibrations in the air or the vibration of an electromagnetic field. Or else, that reminded us of something, the event is on the order of inflection, [Pause] inflections as events of the line, vibrations as events of the wave.
And we saw how, in Whitehead, this vibratory assignment of the event occurred in the form of two series: [Pause] first, extensive series that define themselves as this, they have no final term; they are infinite; they have no limit; they enter into rapports of whole-parts. Typical example of a whole-part rapport, the life of the Pyramid over an hour – during which I am looking at it –, a half hour, a minute, a half-minute, a second, a quarter of a second, a tenth of a second, to infinity. The series tends toward no limit; the series is infinite, and the members of the series enter into rapports of whole and parts. There you have the first type of series.
Notice, if you recall, we found the equivalent in Leibniz. However, I do not at all think that Whitehead borrowed from Leibniz. They have such different contexts. Whitehead speaks in the name of modern physics of the vibration, whereas Leibniz spoke in the name mathematical calculus of series. I believe much more in an encounter (rencontre), especially as I am nonetheless forcing the resemblance a bit. I am saying, in Leibniz, you find a first type of infinite series that we can call extensions. Extensions are not only lengths (longueurs), they are commensurable lengths that enter into rapports of whole-parts, but these are also numbers that enter into rapports of whole-parts. It had seemed to us that it was extensions that, in Leibniz, constituted the object both of definition and demonstration. There you have the first condition.
Second condition, Whitehead presents it to us as follows: the first series have internal characteristics as well, intrinsic characteristics, which enter into a new sort of series, in a second sort of series, or rather to the extent, he says, they enter into a second sort of series. [Pause] What is this second sort of series? Perhaps you recall? These are equally infinite series, but that, this time, tend toward internal limits. They tend toward internal limits: in other words, they are convergent, in the sense used by Whitehead. These are convergent series that converge onto limits. And I was telling you, it’s quite simple: let’s take a sound wave. The sound wave is a first series. In what sense ? In the sense that it has an infinity, or is supposed to have an infinity of harmonics that are sub-multiples of its frequency. Through this, it’s a series of the first type. But, on the other hand, it has intrinsic properties: [Pause] height, intensity, timbre. These intrinsic characteristics themselves enter into series, simply different series from the first type: this time, these are convergent series tending toward limits. There will be rapports between these limits: always the idea in Leibniz as in Whitehead that everything is rapports. There will be rapports between these limits, and you indeed sense that it’s these rapports between these limits that will be predicates. Predicates of what? We called extensions the first type of series; we call intension the second type of series, or if you prefer, extensity and intensity.
The rapports between limits define conjunctions. If you take a light wave, you will also have two types of series. What matters to me is this constitution of two types of superposed series. We saw how Leibniz baptized the internal limits of the second type of series with an extremely precious name: these are, he tells us, requisites. In this regard, the parallelism is very great between Whitehead and Leibniz. These are requisites. For example, timbre, height, intensity are the requisites of sound. [Pause] Harmonics are not requisites. Harmonics are the aggregate of rapports of whole-parts that define the first type of series. The requisites are the limits that define the second type of series, the convergent series.
Moreover, I could say that Leibniz added a third type of series, in relation to Whitehead. You recall, perhaps, the third type of series, for Leibniz, was convergent series that have for supplementary properties to extend themselves into one another, so as to constitute a conjunctive world, the world to be expressed by each monad. So, extendable singularities, or series extendable into one another, convergent series extendable into one another constitute a conjunctive world expressed by all the monads: this would be a third type of series which has no equivalent in Whitehead, and which allows Leibniz to define individuations. As a result, in Leibniz, we would have the three series, you recall, since each individual monad contracts, concentrates a certain number of singularities. So this would indeed be fine because in Leibniz, we would have a scale of three series, one upon the others: extensions, intensions and individuations. In Whitehead, we would only have two series. But that would already be very good; that would not mean that… Why? No doubt that in Whitehead, it’s later, it’s not at the same level that he will discover the phenomenon of individuation.
But for the moment we have only responded to one thing, which is: what are the conditions of the event? The conditions of the event are in the infinite series — it’s a possible answer — the infinite series, provided that they are defined. You can choose two types, I would say: the conditions of the event are two types of series, or three types of series, your choice, of which the event is the conjunction, the event [as] conjunction of two or three types of series.
But while I have so defined the conditions of the event, I haven’t yet defined the composition of the event, and what we had seen the last time was the composition of the event. We had begun to see it with Whitehead, and I remind you that we had said: yes, the composing element of the event is prehension, it’s the farthest prehension, according to Whitehead.[5] For a notion so new as creating the logic of the event, he obviously needed relatively new words: the constituting element of the event is prehension. The prehension constitutes an event. Or rather, since an event is a conjunction that refers to several conditions, one must say that in its composition, it is itself a link, or as Whitehead says, a nexus. From the point of view of its composition, the event is a nexus of prehensions. From the point of view of its conditioning, it’s a conjunction of series; from the point of view of its composition, it’s a nexus of prehensions.
It’s a question of knowing what the different aspects of the prehension are, or rather the parts of the event, what composes the event. We had seen five aspects. I am going quickly in order to save some time. You recall? Every prehension refers to a prehending subject. But the prehending subject does not pre-exist; it’s the prehension, to the extent that it prehends, that constitutes something like a prehending subject – or that is itself constituted as prehending subject. The prehending subject will be the first element.
Second element: the prehended (préhendé). Prehension constitutes what it prehends as a prehended. There again, the prehended does not pre-exist. You will tell me: ok, the prehended doesn’t pre-exist, but what is prehended pre-exists. No. Because what is it that is prehended? Another prehension. The event can only be prehension of prehensions. It’s another prehension, that is, it’s another event; the event is prehension of other events. What other events? Either pre-existing events, or co-existing events. Every event prehends other events. [Pause] Example: the battle of Waterloo is a prehension of Austerlitz. These are two different battles, but I am looking exactly for the events; I am precisely looking for… I could invoke too easily some psychological events. What counts is that the system works outside psychology. It’s not at all psychology; it’s what things are made of!
We will come back to our example since we will encounter it again, the concert. The concert is an event. The piano is a prehension of the violin, and at a given moment, the violin is prehended by the piano. You will tell me: but the reverse is true as well? Yes, but at another moment. There are moments in which it’s the violin that prehends the piano, and there are other moments in which…  This is as I was telling you; it’s what I mean when I say: a particular instrument responds to a particular other one, and what does a page of orchestration consist of  when I distribute sounds to the instruments? The orchestration is the splendid repartition according to which a particular moment will be the prehension of another particular prehension, etc. … How to organize prehensions? It’s always a prehension that is prehender (préhendante), but it’s always a prehension that is prehended. That doesn’t prevent these being very different aspects.
According to the aspect under which a prehension is prehended, we will call it, following Whitehead, a datum. The datum. We will say that every prehension prehends data, that is, pre-existing or previous (préalable) prehensions. [Pause] We will say that the data, that is, what is prehended in a prehension, is the public element of the prehension, the public element of the prehension. A curious word, “public”. I have a reason for emphasizing it in passing, you will understand quickly. Whitehead tells us that public element of prehension is what the prehension prehends, and which itself is a former prehension. So, the prehension that I am, when I prehend, I am not yet public. But when I am prehended by someone among you – when I prehend you, you are my public. When you prehend me, I am your public, which implies that the prehender is inseparable from a private element. But every prehension will be prehended in its turn, one of the great lessons from Whitehead. There is no prehension that will not be prehended in its turn, that is: there is no prehension that will not be a datum for other prehensions to come. Henceforth, I will always be the public of someone who will be private for himself, and will be anew the public of someone else. There will be a whole chain of private-public.
And then, in fact, what is the private element, in opposition to public data, that is, to prehended prehensions? You remember that it’s what he calls feeling. What is feeling? [It’s the] third part of the prehension, but after – from a purely logical point of view – after the prehending subject and the prended data, the feeling is the manner in which the prehender grasps the prehended. That’s what the private element is.
And I tell myself, this is a rather strange usage of private-public; it’s quite funny, especially as [Whitehead] attaches a lot of importance to it in Process and Reality. This usage of private-public seems really bizarre. And then one day – there must be reasons for this, otherwise we’d avoid it. I was preparing for our meetings and then I stumbled upon this strange thing, Discourse on Metaphysics, I was reading along rather superficially because I recalled it, telling myself, ok, it’s just to jog my memory, and lo and behold, I stumble upon this, but that I wouldn’t have rediscovered it, but my God, my God, my God, my God! Discourse on Metaphysics, — I haven’t noted it down… oh yes I did! Paragraph 14, everything depends on the edition, everything depends on the edition. It’s at the beginning, at the beginning of the third paragraph of paragraph 14: — “Now it is God alone … who is the cause of this correspondence in their phenomena” — between monads, otherwise there wouldn’t be any linkage –, “So we could say that…” – oh, no, I jumped ahead – “[Now it is God alone] … who is the cause of this correspondence in their phenomena, and brings it about that what is particular to one” — that is, to a monad; we can’t understand them, these stories of harmonies, that we haven’t yet seen – “about that what is particular to one is public to all. Without that there would be no connection between them.”[6] It’s funny; all of a sudden, this term “public”. So I looked around and I don’t see it elsewhere in Leibniz. Did he use it only this one time? You see, he means that all monads express the same world, that is, that what one prehends is prehended by another, that is, the prehension of a monad is the datum of the prehension of another monad. And there we have, [Pause] there we have … that he has his special public story that seems to me very odd, something to reflect on, I guess (c’est pour rêver, enfin).
And in the end, what interests us more is that Whitehead really insists, regarding the matter of feeling, on this way that the prehending subject prehends the prehended, the datum. He really insists on the possibility of negative feeling, and that interests me enormously. These are phenomena of aversion, phenomena of disgust: I reject an event! Don’t talk to me about that! We have to study negative feelings, the things that one must not talk about, the monads that crack up. You still find today monads that cannot stand you talking to them about 1936. [Laughter] These monads are very interesting. They cannot stand it. That [date] has remained like a kind of open wound, and I’d say that there you have a case of negative feeling. Here, that’s a psychological example, but there are events that are entirely constituted for the expulsion of other events; they are created entirely to cover over (recouvrir), to vomit [onto] a particular event.
And in the end, this should remind us of something. I don’t want to insist on this too much, but this should remind us of something. You recall the damned? [Laughter] But what is the damned? It’s the man who hated God. And for the man who hated God, as Leibniz said: God is everything. The one who hates God is the one who has the greatest hate that exists. The one who hates all, since he hates God, has hate for all God’s creatures, whether men, animals or plants, and even the little stones that hurt no one. He hates all. In other words, he vomits on it all. The definition of the damned in Whitehead would be: the man of negative feeling.
That was the third element. We say that feeling assures the fulfillment (remplissement) of prehension by the prehended. The prehending subject, through feeling, fulfills itself from what it prehends; it fulfills itself from data, and from this fulfillment self-enjoyment is born. I won’t go back over that. It’s indeed like a kind of contraction. If you will, it’s to the extent that the prehension turns back toward what it prehends that it fulfills itself from itself. [Pause] [End of cassette; Interruption of the Web Deleuze transcription] And it’s this strange joy of self that we have seen. It’s so frequent in English philosophy. And like, at the outside… If I say, what are the data, what are the data as limit? What is the datum limit of a prehension? I cannot say that it’s a prehension to infinity. I could say that it’s a prehension to infinity, but I have another possible response. The limit data, these are vibrations as a condition of prehensions. [Pause] Vibratory series, this is [Return to the Web Deleuze transcript] precisely the material of the datum. I can say that any datum is made of vibratory material. It’s to the extent that prehension is a contraction of vibratory elements, and through this, it prehends data, it’s the same thing, and it prehends data because it contracts the vibratory elements that condition the prehension – it’s to this very extent that it fulfills itself with this joy of oneself. As Samuel Butler said – I told you about this the last time – in a splendid book, very English, very much of English philosophy, Life and Habit, wheat is thrilled with being wheat, but how is it thrilled to be wheat? Through contracting, and from the fact that it contracts the Earth and humidity from which it emerges. [Interruption of the BNF recording] It’s the English version, the philosophical version of: Lilies sing the glory of the heavens, plants sing the glory of God, plants bear witness.
Why does all this matter? Leibniz will say exactly the same thing, the same thing concerning music, [Return to the BNF recording] for what is pleasure, in the most precise and deepest sense of the word? Pleasure is contraction of a vibration. You will find a beautiful text by Leibniz on music, “as being pleasure resulting” as he says, “from an unconscious calculus,” the calculus bearing on the vibration of the sound wave. In the Principles of Nature and Grace: “music charms us even though its beauty consists only in relations among numbers, and in the beats or vibrations . . . [of which] we are not aware.”[7] Literally it’s by contracting the number that we achieve the highest pleasure, that is, the pleasure of being oneself. And what are we, we the living, in our organism? I was telling you, in the depth of our organism, and why is it that, even when ill, we have — or we can have if we know how to find it and go all the way to this point of ourselves – this joy of being? What is this joy of being in relation to which… [Pause; Deleuze looks for a quote] the, euh, — I want to cite the author directly, euh – to which all kinds of whining (pleurnicheries) are kinds of suffering? This joy of being is nothing other than what we call pleasure, that is, the operation that consists of contracting the elements from which we result.
And myself, [as] body, what does it mean to have a body? If I prejudge from what we have left to do, what does it mean to have a body, except contracting these vibratory series? What does it mean to have a body except contracting what? Miserable or grandiose things, that is, things that have always been Gods, specifically contracting the water, the earth, the salts, the carbon of which we are the result. And we fulfill ourselves with ourselves by turning ourselves back towards these series that we contract. It’s self-enjoyment. It’s what we will call the unconscious calculus of any being. In this sense, we are pure music. And if we are pure music, it’s under this aspect, [that of] self-enjoyment. From which we are perhaps aware that in the history of what an event is, the concert is anything that you like, except a simple metaphor.
It’s important to have done with – if it’s possible, we’re never done in this domain, and we really must not entirely finish this — to do away with the stupidities about Leibniz’s optimism. For it is well known and if there is an expression that has passed into posterity regarding Leibniz, it’s the idea that our world is the “best of all possible worlds.” You know what happened: at a certain date, Lisbon underwent a terrible earthquake. And this earthquake had a role, as strange as it might be – and one would have to look into whether this is a natural phenomenon that was then used — in Europe of which I only see the equivalent in the Nazi concentration camps, to wit: the question that reverberated after the war, how is it possible to still believe in reason once one recognizes that Auschwitz occurred, and that a certain type of philosophy became impossible, that had nonetheless created the history of the nineteenth century, or seemed to create the history of the nineteenth century? It’s very odd that in the eighteenth century, it was the Lisbon earthquake that took on something like that, where all of Europe said: how is it still possible to maintain a certain optimism founded on God? You see, after Auschwitz, the question reverberated: how is it still possible to maintain the least bit of optimism about what human reason might be? After the Lisbon earthquake, how is it possible to maintain the least bit of belief in a rationality of divine origin?
[Interruption, a student starts to ask a question, possibly about a specific date] Now there, listen, if you are asking a question to embarrass me… You know quite well that I don’t know any [of that] [Laughter; the student continues]… And what do I look like to you?… Ah! “Catastrophe” !… Ah, my God, doesn’t anyone have a Larousse dictionary ? No one has… ?  It was in those years there… Aie, aie, aie [Discussions among the students] Ah, no, he’s asking me if it’s the year…. Oh, la la… [To an amusing comment from another student] Ah, yes, right, it was before the war! [Laughter] Refer to your basic Larousse.
[Another student starts to ask a question, with : If I am asking this question, it’s because…] Ah, la la, this is getting into rough weather… Yes, why? [Student: I wanted to know if it was before the schism between Catholics and Protestants]… Ah! Well after, well after. It’s after Leibniz, in any case. Leibniz was not aware, in my view… You know? [Another student relates the date of the Lisbon earthquake: 1755 ; Deleuze continues by singing the date] Sev-En-Teen-Hun-Dred Fif-ty-Five… So there we have it, very good! You’re sure? 1755, right? And in Lisbon ? [Laughter] Of course, I knew that. [Laughter] I was just pretending ! So… well, you see ? That’s how it is, right…
And that gives rise to Voltaire’s famous text against Leibniz, notably the little novel Candide, in which there’s a naïve young man indoctrinated by a philosophy professor. It’s a catalogue of every human abomination, and there is the professor who always explains to Candide that everything is for the best in the best of all possible worlds. This text by Voltaire is a veritable masterpiece. So it’s not a question of saying that Voltaire was wrong, because understand, the grandeur of Voltaire’s book is that it undertakes to rework a certain number of problems including, as one passes through this novel, the problem of good and evil, that can no longer be posed as it had been in the preceding century. I believe that it’s the end of the happy and the damned (les heureux et les damnés). One must truly say that up until and including Leibniz, the problem of good and evil had been posed in terms of the happy and the damned. With Voltaire, with the eighteenth century, from 1755 onward [Deleuze insists comically on this date], that [topic] was stated differently. So who will institute a new mode of thought regarding evil and the existence of evil?
Thus, I do not want to say at all that Voltaire is literature, not at all. I believe that Candide belongs to works that are at once literature and philosophy of the greatest importance. What I want to look into, it’s just, and this excludes nothing from Candide, is what was the status of Leibniz’s optimism? And it’s true that it was an optimism founded on divine rationality; there’s nothing more to be said about that. But what interests me is that, even from this point of view, one mustn’t think that theologians of the period were saying: well yes indeed, everything evil that happens, the death of innocents, wars, atrocities, that’s all been settled. They didn’t wait for the Lisbon earthquake. It’s very odd that the Lisbon earthquake occurred at a moment at which thought, and its way of considering the question of evil, was already undergoing change. So it had all its effect. But previously catastrophes and abominations both from God and from man were well known.
Therefore, in the history of Leibniz’s optimism, I insist on this, it’s that, about optimism, one must distinguish two correlative optimisms, a subjective optimism and an objective optimism. I mean that objective optimism is: this world is the best of possible worlds, and why? That refers to compossibility, and I won’t return to the topic. It refers to the objective notion of compossibility, specifically: there are series of singularities that extend into one another, if you recall, and then there are points of divergence. So there will be as many worlds as divergences, all worlds being possible, but they are incompossible within one another. So God chose one of these worlds. And the answer is that God could only choose the best, [it] could only choose the best; that’s as far as it goes, this is optimism. Moreover, there’s Leibniz’s expression, you understand? Everything comes back; must we say: this world exists because it is the best? Certain of Leibniz’s texts go in this direction. Or must we say the opposite: this world is the best since it is and because it is and because it is the one that is? But objective optimism cannot receive, it seems to me, does not contain its reason in itself; it implies a reason coming from elsewhere and which can only be given through subjective optimism. And I’d say, what is subjective optimism? It’s self-enjoyment.
Whatever the abomination of the world might be, whatever the abomination of the world might be, there is something that cannot be taken from you and through which you are invincible. This is not your egotism; there as well it’s full of… It’s certainly not your egotism; it’s not your tiny pleasure about being “me”. It’s something much more grandiose that Whitehead called precisely self-enjoyment, that is, this kind of vital heart in which you contract your elements, whether these are elements of a music, elements of a chemistry, vibratory waves, etc. … and become yourself by contracting these elements and by turning yourself back toward these elements. It will be this type of joy, a joy of Becoming, this joy of Becoming self that you find in all thinking of the vitalist kind. And, you recall – I remind you of this just to make some necessary adjustments — “let this joy increase!”, that’s the formula of subjective optimism, “let this joy increase!”, that is, that it might become the joy of more and more people. And that does not mean that the world will go better, and that does not mean that there will be fewer abominations. It’s something else. It’s a question of something else. It is not a question of saying that abominations are going to leave me indifferent. On all these points, Leibniz expressed himself marvelously in the text to which I refer you and that we have already used quite a bit: The Philosopher’s Confession. Being content with the world, he tells us, that doesn’t at all mean: take good care of your ego. That’s not at all what it means. That means precisely finding in the self the strength to resist all that is abominable, and finding in the self the strength to endure the abominable when it happens to you.
In other words, self-enjoyment is being worthy of an event, knowing how or managing to be worthy of the event.[8] Who can ever predict: I would be worthy of the event that happens to me? Whatever the event might be, be it a catastrophe or falling in love, there are people who are unworthy of what happens to them, even when these are not very prodigious events. Being worthy of what happens! It’s a theme that runs through philosophy. If philosophy is useful for anything, it’s for this kind of thing : persuading us, not teaching us, persuading us that it’s a problem, that one must know how, that it would be better to know how to be worthy of what happens to us, that it would be a great misfortune or that it would be a great good fortune. Because if you manage to be worthy of what happens to you, at that moment you will know very well what is unimportant in what happens to you, and what is important in what happens to you. In other words, what is important in an event? What has no importance at all in an event? It’s not necessarily what one might believe. One must already have all these ethics of worthiness/dignity (dignité). Being worthy (être digne) of what happens, that’s what vitalism is. In Leibniz, consider the entire end of The Philosopher’s Confession, it’s there.
And you recall Leibniz’s idea, specifically that thank God the damned exist, for the damned having reduced the region that has devolved to them, having narrowed their subdivision (you recall: the small clear region that they expressed). Because they vomited on God, henceforth they have renounced this clear region. The damned having fallen into an extreme confusion due to hating God, it’s an idea, once again, that seems sublime to me, the idea of the damned: it makes you want to be one! [Laughter] That’s what they did, and henceforth it’s thanks to them [that] they left fantastic unused quantities of virtual joy. Let us take hold of these joys, let us take hold of these empty, unfulfilled enjoyments. We must appropriate them to ourselves. Then the damned will be furious in seeing that their damnation serves us, and is useful for something. Yes, damnation serves to increase the total quantity of self-enjoyment of the aggregate of those who are not damned or not yet damned. There we have the fourth element.
And then there is still a fifth element. You certainly sense that there is a necessary fifth element that I will outline quickly. It’s that everything asks for it, it’s feeling that asks for it: feeling demands that there is a kind of conformity of one feeling with another in the same prehending subject, a kind of conformity of feelings. Conformity means: belonging to a same form, to a same subjective form. The prehended demands something else than an instantaneous or immediate presentation. [Pause] Self-enjoyment presents itself as the affect of a pure Becoming of self, a becoming oneself. All this implies a sort of duration into which the event plunges and of which the minimum is a junction of an immediate past and near future. I was telling you: that’s what optimism is in the end, persuasion that it’s going to last, persuasion that after one beat of my heart another one will follow. And if this persuasion results in telling oneself or reaching a point that, perhaps, it won’t always be this way, but there will nonetheless be another heart, fine, perhaps there is a link among self-enjoyments.
In other words, what I grasp and what I feel is never reduced to an immediate presentation, including feeling. It’s grasped by a prehending subject which, one way or another, plunges into the past and tends toward a future. It’s what he [Whitehead] calls the fifth or final element that he calls: the subjective aim (visée subjective), subjective aim. He gives a very good example; what we perceive, we perceive it as immediate and instantaneous, for example: I turn my head and I perceive the window. But this window that I perceived when I turn my head, I perceive it with eyes, I touch it with hands that themselves plunge into an immediate past. You notice how this is going to create the unity of everything, for what is a sensory organ or, if you prefer, an organ of prehension? It’s a process of contraction, and uniquely that, a surface of contraction (plaque de contraction), a process of contraction. Ears are surfaces for contracting sound waves and, in certain conditions, for explaining what I hear and I don’t hear in the sound wave. Someone, whose ears are ailing, for example, might still contract the bass sounds very well and not contract the high notes: [the ear] doesn’t hear the high notes.
I would like for you to contribute all kinds of things yourself, and that’s an idea from Whitehead, that seems very, very important to me: that it’s with organs coming from the past, however recent, coming from even a very close past, that I immediately grasp the present. And with this he is no doubt going to have the basis for subjective aim. Why can’t I continue on this level? Because you sense that subjective aim is going to encompass both continuity and causality. Continuity and causality, we can only undertake the analysis, in Leibniz as well as in Whitehead, we can only undertake the analysis in the third part.
Let’s summarize rapidly, ok? I sense that in Leibniz as with Whitehead, you not only have the three series that provide the conditions of the event, but the five parts of the event. Now I am going very fast. At Leibniz’s level, I would say: the prehending subject is really the equivalent of the monad. The monad is prehension of the world. [Pause] The datum is the world itself, and I would say then, if necessary, that doesn’t correspond and it’s even better. That is, there are notions that have no equivalent in the other [author]. I would say, yes, for Leibniz, you see, that each monad prehends the entire world, but only prehends clearly a small portion. The entire world is public, since at the same time, it’s [the world] that other monads prehend. My small portion is reserved for me, why? Because, no doubt, it is prehended by others, but the others only prehend it in confused fashion. There is a portion of the world that I prehend, that I express clearly. The others express it only in confused fashion. However limited it might be, don’t take away my own goods, my private domain. Prehensions, he gives them a name, are perceptions, and Leibniz will create a splendid theory that we will see in our third part, a splendid theory of tiny perceptions to the extent that, on this point, Whitehead has strictly nothing to add. And no one will have…  Wait, I take back what I am saying; [Pause] there will be almost nothing to add to such a theory as beautiful as Leibniz’s theory of tiny perceptions, which are really unconscious prehensions. [Pause] We have seen finally how self-enjoyment was related to Leibnizian joy and optimism.
And finally, subjective aim is exactly, it seems to me, what Leibniz calls appetition. In the end he will say finally, to sum up everything: what are the deepest characteristics of the monad? The deepest characteristics of the monad are perception and appetition. And he will define perception by the detail of what changes; perception is the detail of what changes, and appetition is the internal principle of change. Begin, Monadology, paragraph… [Deleuze searches in his edition], paragraph…  “It follows from that what we said” — paragraph 11 and after — “that natural changes in a monad . . . come from an internal force . . . But in addition to the general force for change, . . . there must be the detailed nature of the changing substance, this being what makes it belong to one species rather than another. This detailed nature must bring …”, and there you are, and he will baptize them perception and appetition.… [End of cassette; interruption in the Web Deleuze transcript] “The action of the internal force that brings about the change [or the passage] from one perception to another can be called appetition.”[9] Fine, there, I won’t say anything more since this enters largely into the third part [of the course]. I am just saying that here is the psychological criterion of substance. For Leibniz, the psychological principle of substance will launch us into our final problem. The psychological principle of substance is: perception and appetition are the elements of substance. Substance is an ego (moi); there we have the psychological criterion. Substance is an ego of which the component elements are perception and appetition, confronted with substance being a “I think, therefore I am” from Descartes. I believe that on this point, we will be led to create an opposition between the two [kinds of substance]. Fine.
Such that we continue to move forward, and now we have to draw conclusions… Yes, are there any points that… Ah, but no, oh la la… But no, I forgot something essential. Aie, aie, aie, aie… Let’s go back, with a final effort. Yes, this is essential, otherwise I’d be angry with myself for having forgotten it. How did I manage to… Ah, yes, I know why I forgot it: it’s because I didn’t want to present it to you, right! [Laughter] Ah, this is idiotic, but no, one more effort then… I wanted to ease off on you, but after all, there’s no… There remains a problem here. – [Pause; interruption, Deleuze speaks to several students] I am sure that you can be more comfortable by sliding over a bit… Yes, get yourself situated more comfortably, ok? … And in fact, we can make some… Don’t leave, ok, because when you leave, I have noticed that you only return in a very uncertain way, [Laughter] but we can stop for two minutes if you have questions to ask, on the condition that these questions imply no answers, [Laughter] and aren’t of the kind “When did something occur?”… [Noises of movements in the room; interruption of the BNF recording, then return, with the sound of Deleuze’s successive groans, recalling the students to a certain order]
Fine, then, it’s well known that Whitehead’s philosophy rests on two great notions – he doesn’t have only two! – The two great concepts are actual occasions and eternal objects. We have not said a word about eternal objects. I will proceed quickly; you recall what actual objects are, they’re events, events insofar as they are conditioned by series, by vibratory series, and are composed by prehensive elements, the elements of prehension. It’s what gives us the event. But it’s odd – notice this — because there’s nothing that subsists in all that. Vibrations [Pause] never stop circulating. [Pause] If I think about what I cannot yet think, since it’s our third part, if I think about the body, here I am jumping from Whitehead to Leibniz, but I beg you, since we are talking about their commonality (communauté). [Pause]
Paragraph 71 of Monadology: “Some people who have misunderstood my ideas” — he’s denouncing a misunderstanding of his thought, so that we no longer have to do so — “have thought me to have implied that each soul has a mass or a portion of matter which is its own, and is assigned to it forever.” In other words, when I would speak to you about bodies, Leibniz tells us, don’t go thinking that each soul has a body that belongs to it. And why? “All bodies are in a perpetual state of flux, like rivers” — he knows Heraclitus’s phrase — “with parts” – corpuscles — “constantly coming into them and going out”, they never stop going out. It’s the same for vibratory waves. But moreover, perceptions of the monad, details of what changes, all that never stops changing. You will tell me: fine, but we could foresee all that since we introduced the factor of duration as the final component, with the subjective aim, something that endures and that creates a synthesis of the present with the near past and the near future.
But duration, what does that mean? It could last a hundred years, but that doesn’t at all answer the question. The Great Pyramid endures, yes, but in relation to what? It lasts longer than a fly, that’s all. We mustn’t confuse a something that lasts with true permanence, or if you prefer, with something eternal. I can say that a mountain lasts, but a mountain is an event, as much as a fly, no more and no less. It’s an event, not on the same scale. To grasp the mountain as event, that is, as incessant folding (plissement), that never stops folding and refolding (se plisser, se replisser), since it loses its molecules at every instant, it also renews its molecules. So it recommences eternally its own folding. I only have duration, agreed, that’s all.
And duration possibly gives me the similar (le semblable). A wave follows after a wave, a vibration follows after a vibration, which makes me say: it is the same (même). The problem of the same is not in the least exhausted by duration, however long it might be. The same is not the continuous. What is the problem of the same? What makes me say: it’s the same wave? You will tell me: generality? No, since I say it even at the level of the individual. It’s the same Pierre that I saw yesterday; moreover it’s the same note in the concert. I was saying, I chose the example: Ah yes, it’s [Alban] Berg’s “si” (le “si” de Berg).[10] Ah yes, it’s such a color. Ah yes, it’s the green of a particular painter. [Pause] There you have all that Whitehead is going to call eternal objects. The eternal object is what I recognize as the same – you see the difference — throughout a plurality of events or actual occasions. I say: it’s the Great Pyramid. Ah yes, there you have the Great Pyramid! You sense that there was something unexplained in events, actual occasions. How can I say that it’s the same Great Pyramid? Ha, it’s the Great Pyramid. Ah yes, it hasn’t moved! Ha, you haven’t aged at all, Pierre! Pierre, you haven’t aged, it’s you. I recognize you. I don’t say: a wave follows after another wave, I don’t say: Pierre follows after Pierre. I say: it’s you, Pierre. I say: Oh, hello, O Great Pyramid! These are all the types of propositions that we have to take into account, eternal object and not actual occasions.
And Whitehead’s vocabulary becomes very beautiful, very poetic. He defined the event as a concrescence. You can choose: it’s a concrescence of series that condition it, or a concrescence of prehensions that compose it. Every event is a concrescence. But he is going to define eternal objects as ingressions: the eternal object makes ingression into the event. And it’s in this ingression of the eternal object that I can say: it’s the Great Pyramid! It’s a “si”! Ah, the “si”, you heard it?! Or else, did you see this Prussian blue! This very special blue that isn’t even Prussian blue, that we only find… you saw it! There you have the eternal object that makes ingression into and causes waves succeeding waves. You say: but it’s the same thing. Only you don’t say “it’s the same thing” of the wave that is no longer completely the same; you say it’s the same thing of a certain type of object that you are going to call internal objects insofar as they make ingression into events. And you see, it’s not without some coyness that Whitehead could claim a link to Plato in saying: ah well yes, eternal object are bit like what Plato called Ideas. Only for Whitehead, eternal objects are nothing other than the components of the event insofar as they make ingression into the event.
So, what will these eternal objects be? He distinguished three kinds, at first glance. In the simplest text, he distinguishes three kinds. The Sensibles: this green! This shade of color! Useless to say: the color, it also is an eternal object, but it’s not simply generalities. This blue! This green! This musical note! This group of notes! And in fact, think again of my example. We are at the concert, we hear Vinteuil’s music, and there, Charlus prehends the little musical phrase, the famous little phrase by Vinteuil.[11] He prehends it and he looks at it, he listens to it with great emotion. It’s Morel who is playing it. It’s his [Charlus’s] lover who is playing it. It’s composed of a certain aggregate of very individualized notes that Proust details; it’s extremely well analyzed. And there it’s a prehension of the little phrase, but that Charlus has heard thousands of times communicated by other sound waves.
You see, the eternal object is the same that makes ingression into a plurality of actual occasions, all concerts in which I have heard this little phrase, at least in which I await the moment at which it will burst forth and when I say: ah yes, there it is! Or else I say: oh no, the bastard, he ruined it! [Laughter] And if I say, the bastard, he ruined it, I would have the equivalent…  Don’t be surprised, henceforth, that Whitehead uses the term: there are conceptual feelings. The conceptual feeling is the rapport of the prehension, how it’s no longer to other prehensions, but to eternal objects that make ingression into the event. And if there are conceptual feelings, there are negative conceptual feelings, of the type like those I described: how can someone massacre such a work? It could happen that someone says, to the orchestra leader: but my God, how can someone massacre such a work? I would have a negative feeling, [Deleuze laughs] a conceptual negative feeling. If it’s just the opposite, [then] I am waiting for it, I am waiting for it, and it’s coming.
So, it varies; it’s not beautiful, but I suppose that an eternal object has its fringe of variations, but it is completely individualized. It’s not a generality. It’s really: Which sound aggregate? There you have the example of a sensible eternal object. And you can imagine thousands and thousands and thousands of “concert” events, a thousand concerts, and it will always be this eternal object that makes ingression at a particular moment. So it’s really something very different from actual occasions, the eternal objects with their ingressions.
And then there are scientific eternal objects: atoms, electrons, triangles, etc. It seems obvious to me; there are rare texts by Whitehead going in this direction. There also have to be eternal objects of feelings. Feelings also do not guarantee their identity. There certainly must be an eternal object [as] “anger”; why? Or else isn’t it necessary? You get angry (literally, tu fais ta colère, you are creating your anger), or there he goes, he’s getting his anger on. He’s getting his anger on. It’s time to get out of here, he’s getting into “his anger”; “his anger” is what? It’s not me that…  As if anger were able to be individual. In fact, a hatred, an anger are perfectly individuated. People have a style of anger, and generally it’s even for that reason that one doesn’t recognize them. There are grand cholerics about whom we will never know to what point they are choleric because they have a style of anger that precisely does not have – how to say it? –has no kind of tempo. There are people about whom one knows immediately when they are going to get angry; there are even more complicated cases. What is the secret of their anger? But “your anger”, it’s an eternal object, provided that…  Ah, yes, is this one of them? If it makes ingression into a plurality of events, into diverse events: imagine a very choleric woman, to change things since we always refer…! It’s certain that this woman’s anger, and not anger in general, is an eternal object.
So there would be feelings of eternal objects, just as there is the Great Pyramid-event, there is the Great Pyramid-eternal object, one is a concrescence, the other is ingression. Isn’t it the same thing for feelings, my most important problems? I mean, to define eternal objects, how does Whitehead define eternal objects? He says: these are determinabilities or potentialities. Why? Because, in fact, they only are actualized in events: Vinteuil’s little phrase is only a potentiality that comes into actual existence only in an actual occasion, that is, when it is performed. Otherwise it’s a pure potentiality. Yet, this does not keep it, as pure potentiality, from having a fully individual existence. It’s very important, all this. You have to play around… I mean, there’s no difficulty, but to get you used to this mode of thought, you have to play with it: “this green”! is a pure potentiality. Imagine: the world is haunted by potentialities. What is a ghost?
How many little phrases are strolling around in the world, [phrases] that have never been actualized and will perhaps never be? And what is their mode of existence, do they have any? Is there a mode of existence for them? Perhaps. One must reflect deeply about that.
In any case, it’s quite insufficient.  We cannot define eternal objects as simple forms of recognition. For the moment, we have to take account of this – [Deleuze turns toward a student] Are you the one eating? [Laughter] Do it, do it quickly, all at once, see? There… If people are arriving, they always arrive when someone is politely being really careful, and then it’s ten times more catastrophic than … [Laughter] – So, I am saying, as simple forms of recognition, that just doesn’t suffice, that doesn’t suffice. Fortunately, we have the means… And it’s almost, I don’t mean that they just stay put there, especially since, given that Whitehead is above all a physicist-mathematician, he does not stay put there. An electron is not a form of recognition, it’s entirely something else. Once again, there is the electron, a particle carried by a wave, and that’s the electron-actual occasion. Then there’s the electron-eternal object. Strange, suddenly things have doubled in his works. You have the eternal object making ingression into the event, and the event with its components.
And I say, obviously not. Leibniz would give us what we want. – If you recall what we did… For me… As a result of our preceding analyses, if you don’t recall, it’s no problem, it’s of no importance. If you recall, so much the better — there are three sorts of eternal objects. In my view, or in the manner of Leibniz, I would define them as follows: there is a first sort of the eternal objects, the definables or demonstrables. Definable or demonstrable objects: these are all those that enter into whole-part rapports. These are extensities. A second sort of the eternal objects: the requisites or limits and rapports between limits, all those that re-enter into the intensities. When I say the sound has a height, intensity, a timbre, these are three eternal objects. And finally, the third sort of the eternal objects: the singularities. You see that individuals who are very special compositions (composés) of singularities do not enter, I believe, into eternal objects. Individuals are transmitters (porteurs); they condense, they contract singularities, eternal objects; that is, eternal objects make ingression into the individuals. On the other hand, eternal objects are perfectly singular, but these are not individuals. So there you have it…. Yes?
Question [from Richard Pinhas]: A precise question that falls into the framework being developed…
Deleuze [while sitting and rocking]: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah (ouais ouais ouais ouais!)
Pinhas: If we take the case of a green suit, or even the green of this suit, we have on one hand the potentiality and, on the other hand, its realization. In the case of writing a musical piece, it happens that we have, on one hand – and I would really like to know how you place it, because that interests me, the musical work thought through by the composer – we have stage 1, in his head, and second the writing of the musical partition, that is, the written work but not yet performed, and third, the work performed by the orchestra, that is, realized and audible. The sensation [is] that it is three domains, so a multiplicity of domains.
Gilles: Yes, I think it’s very interesting; yes, your comment is completely correct. In such a process of ingression, to speak like him [Whitehead], in an ingression, one must speak about several levels. If we say a potentiality is actualized, by necessity the actualization is not a homogeneous process. An actualizing thing is actualized on successive levels, and sometimes to short-circuit a particular level. For example, in fact, let’s take the example of a musical piece: so how does that begin? What could one call the kernel, even before the piece exists? What is it? I’d say what there is — but here I proceed from my own understanding – I would say, you know, at the base of everything in music, there is the ritornello/refrain. The basis is a little refrain. You might say: where is this little refrain? It could be in the air. It’s not human; it could be cosmic. It might be a little refrain over there, in a distant galaxy. So a little refrain, everything starts with that.
Let’s suppose that this little refrain gets seized… — Ah, shit, I no longer have any memory, it’s very odd: each time that I want a precise proper name, it slips away. That’s aging; it’s terrible.  Mahler’s “The Song of the Earth,” that’s it. — It gets seized by Mahler. I insist on this because he really is a captor of refrains, but finally he’s not the only one. Already nothing other than his prehension of the eternal object. You see, prehension is no longer prehension of prehension, it’s prehension of an eternal object. The prehension of an eternal object [is] when it’s Mahler who prehends the little refrain; it’s not the same thing when it’s you or me. Why? Because, without speaking about his particular genius, he apprehends already through an entire technical armature that, in some cases, some among you have, but me, I don’t have it. Already these prehensions are different. [There’s a] popular tune, at a Hungarian corner café; I’m having an aperitif with, — ah, there’s another name – next to Bartok, it’s obvious that in the little Hungarian tune that we hear, Bartok’s prehension is different. But I say a little refrain, that could initially be non-sound (non sonore), and the musician grasps it as a sound refrain. For example, a movement: you see two children walking along in a certain way. They don’t need to sing in order for this to be a little refrain.
So there you have it. The eternal object, if you tried to define its kernel, it’s the little refrain. And then what happens? Prehension is a first level of actualization, prehension not of the prehension, but of the eternal object. You see, then, each time it is forking: my prehension of the little refrain connects to other prehensions, and that’s the actual occasion aspect. And on the other hand, it’s prehension of the eternal object, of the little refrain bouncing along in the air. But you say to me: but where does it come from? I wouldn’t tell you. No one wants to ask that! There are philosophies in which there are reasons to ask that, but not here. There is no reason to ask where the little refrain comes from. At that moment, one would answer with insults, a blow from a stick. A blow from a stick is also a little refrain. So we will have answered as was required. [End of the Web Deleuze transcript]
Fine, so, it’s Mahler who gives it obviously — there, prehending, prehending his eternal object, this kind of pure potentiality — who gives it a level of actualization. He goes back home and writes; he takes his music paper and he writes, he writes something. It’s a new level of actualization. He’s really going to compose; he notes down the little phrase there like Vintueil no doubt noted his little phrase. He could have done it on … on his shirt sleeve, [Pause] and he truly composes, a new level of actualization. And nonetheless, it’s still potentiality. It will have to be performed. What is music that hasn’t been performed? It’s already at a high level of actuality, but there you will have to perform it. Yes, that’s enough.
So, for all the examples you have, as long as it hasn’t been performed, to some extent, it must be performed as if the process of actualization demanded this final thing. Specifically the ingression will not be definitive as long as it isn’t created in an occasion that unites all the characteristics of the event. For I could perhaps show that, at each level, there are only certain characteristics of the actual occasion that are realized. But only the performance in concert will yield for music, what, what they called in the Middle Ages the ultimate act, the ultimate act of the form, the ultimate element of actuality. And then, for other disciplines, that doesn’t seem to be the same thing. I don’t have a feeling, for example, that exhibiting in a painting exhibition has the same meaning in pictorial actualization as performing for musical actualization. It’s something else. It’s not… Writing is something else again. What is the ending, what is the ultimate act of writing? There are many authors who thought, in the end, [that] the reading act was required, that is, one had to read. Fortunately, it’s an idea that has disappeared because… because… yes, ok. Fine, you see? All these are problems that we have to ask ourselves.
As a result, finally, I am getting to these necessary conclusions about… Henceforth, if it’s true that everything is event and that even eternal objects make ingressions into events, [Pause] everything always brings us back to this new conception. What is henceforth this new theory of substance that Leibniz proposes to us, a theory about which we saw in advance that we could call it Mannerist? And here, I’d like to tell you – we won’t have the time, we never have enough time, I don’t know, I’ll never get finished, if this continues – I want to relate to you how I see things.
We could say – this is just to give you some ideas; you must not believe what I am saying – I tell myself the Greeks, you know, the Greeks in Greek philosophy, something strikes me, it’s that they thought… What could define the Greek mind? And I’d say that it’s a prodigious way of thinking as a function of an entire play of oppositions, and that Greek philosophy began like that: constructing the play of principal oppositions, perhaps. And this will go right to Aristotle, [Pause] although there was another element that already would be introduced, starting from Plato, would already be introduced, but anyway… About opposition, they have an extraordinarily supple notion. If you think – a typical example – I will state as reference point two. Reference point: the philosophers that were called the Great Physicists, the first, for whom the great problem is to establish oppositions between primary elements: the dry and the wet, the hot and the cold, water and earth, etc., and henceforth, transformation, cyclical transformations.
Second fundamental point, for me, is the Aristotelian theory of oppositions. — It’s something that you have to learn by heart, but I don’t have the time to teach it to you, the theory of opposites in Aristotle. — And all of Greek thought seems to me… I am saying that there is another element, yes; I believe that this other element is what emerges under a rather different term, it’s – I’ve just said it – it’s the theme of difference. And it’s odd how in Plato, perhaps the difference emerges as a function and in very complex relations with structures of opposition. [Pause] In Aristotle as well, it’s on structures of opposition that the whole theme of specific differences is founded, the theme of difference. And then, with the neo-Platonists, I am saying, it’s almost the end of the Greek world, and if you recognize it in this, what the theme of difference brings it, brings it of a [inaudible] symmetry starting with Plotinus. This seems obvious to me about the theme of opposition. [Pause]
I am providing a real bird’s eye view. It’s so… I am speaking solely for those for whom this might offer some ideas, but above all, don’t believe me! All this doesn’t go without saying; this will only be good if you know how to derive something from it. I mean it’s not at all, euh… I’m saying it like this, and the way I am saying it, it’s even stupid, it’s even arbitrary; it’s like, take this as pure hypotheses, as impressions.
I am telling you, the whole Middle Ages, do you realize? They talked that way through the entire Middle Ages. What does one see? Provided that I can… Let’s stick with the Gothic. What is the great Gothic thought? I believe that, of course, Christalism has passed on. But about the Gothic, we could say that it’s a profusion; of course, the Gothic is a profusion, but a profusion of what? It’s odd that… It’s not a question of opposition; of course, we find great texts on opposition in the Middle Ages, and this is not what’s central. The question is no longer: how do things oppose each other in a way that one can emerge from the other? And you sense well why? It’s that the Christians don’t particularly care for these stories of transformation. These Christians don’t at all relate to something being able to emerge from something else. This is a Greek idea, things emerging and able to emerge from something else. Of course, they cannot avoid a physics of elements and their transformations, but it’s here that they are the strongest. It’s not by chance that they are going to make of movement, of local movement, something increasingly established because local movement is opposed to alteration, that is to qualitative changes. I don’t particularly like that there is a relation between Christianity and mechanicism. It’s obvious that Christianity never cared for movements other than local ones, that is, movements of alteration, qualitative alteration.
But in the end, there’s a great profusion. And what is in profusion in the Gothic? I’d say that what’s in profusion are all the even craziest kinds of distinction, and that’s what’s in play. Here I wouldn’t agree with – well, “I wouldn’t agree with”, this is among the stupid propositions. — There’s [Wilhelm] Wörringer who is a fundamental critic, who has written on the Gothic, and then [Erwin] Panofsky as well. They agree that, they tend to say, yes, look closely, between Gothic architecture and the syllogistic in philosophy, there are extremely deep relations. [Pause] So, good, fine, yes, I’m not saying they are wrong, not at all, not at all. But, that’s not what striking to me; that’s not what’s striking to me. I tell myself, ah well yes, certainly, but for me, that doesn’t finish this off… It’s not at all that… I am not pretending to say something better; I am pretending to say something different, which doesn’t exclude that…
But what strikes me is that the Gothic is not only the art of the syllogism; it’s not the syllogistic. It’s a very astonishing art, an art of invention of modes of distinction that is in all directions. It’s teeming there; it’s a profusion of modes of distinction. And the disputes between great philosophers of the Middle Ages appear to me less of the kind “And what about your syllogism?” than the kind “How do you distinguish this or that?” That is, fine, God is three persons in one. What kind of distinction [is this]? What is this? What is the distinction of persons in God? [Pause] What is the distinction between form and matter? You will tell me, but that’s just pure Aristotle, what is the distinction between form and matter? Look, look at whether in Aristotle the question, “What is the distinction between form and matter?”, if it’s not necessarily [posed] through, first, in what manner are matter and form opposed in order that the question of distinction might be asked, whereas, on the contrary, the opposition form-matter that exists perfectly in the Middle Ages and that exists equally, but [where] it’s the question of distinction that has become primary. What distinction is there between this and that? What distinction is there between the world… And you sense that for Christianity, it’s necessarily a problem of distinction,  that they are not going to say, for example, that the world is opposed to God. They will say this from certain perspectives; the world is finite and God is infinite, the world is bad and God is good. They will say all this, but if Christians pushed the opposition, if they pushed this, they are going to reconcile it immediately.
Their problem is the problem of distinction. What distinction is there between God and the world? Is God in the world? Is the world in God? Is one exterior to the other ? In any case, one must not confuse God and the world. But if I say, the world is in God, or if I say, God is in the world, or if I say, God and the world are exterior to one another, these are three different kinds of distinction. What are these kinds of distinction? Let us reflect on the kinds of distinction. They will not cease multiplying distinctions. And if you take the two great philosophers of the Middle Ages, notably Saint Thomas and Duns Scotus, with a preference that you all have for Duns Scotus, [Laughter] you’ll see! Scotus is someone who never stops adding continually onto the pile of distinctions. Oh, we have to add more still! There is no one who understood the innovation in Duns Scotus’s words; there are some admirable pages, admirable about the necessity of introducing a new kind of distinction. In the end, I think that fundamentally this thought is a creative profusion on the modes of distinction and their distribution through God, the world and creatures. And perhaps, after all, the syllogism depends on this; we’d have to see, I don’t know. I don’t know if the two ideas, the one I am proposing to you and the one from [inaudible] are easy to reconcile or else if… Well, I don’t know, but anyway, it doesn’t matter.
And so, I’d say, still going quickly, the Classical is what? — [There’s a noise that disturbs Deleuze] Oh, that really pisses me off, that (ça me fait chier) … This isn’t even human! – The Classical is what? It’s a return to order. You know the Classical; it’s required, and I’m not saying that this is bad, it’s fine and maybe necessary, and anyway, the Classicists are creators. But there is no doubt that you recognize Classical authors based on there being a kind of return to order, this is clear. And it’s all finished eh? Finished, the Gothic! No more of that silliness! [Laughter] No, no, no, no, that cannot last, no more inventing like that. No more of that kind of profusion. We are putting everything in order. There are no more of the ­x kinds of distinctions. And you don’t know how to think because you distinguish every which way, and you distinguish every which way because you are inventing humanity through this pile of distinctions, and this is properly idiotic!
And it’s Descartes, and certainly, Descartes is the one who says, “I think, therefore I am”, but it’s also he that says “Let’s deal with this problem of distinction”. There are three types of distinction, and not one more, and literally, eat shit (je vous emmerde), that is, it’s on this tone! Why are the Middle Ages horrible? Because they no longer know what is distinct from what and in what form! There’s urgency in the logic of making and imposing a new logic that will be the logic of distinction. There are only three distinctions. One will be called “real”, the real distinction; the other will be called “of reason,” the distinction of reason; and the third will be called “modal”, and all other distinctions are cut off and deemed to be valueless. [Pause]
Example: fortunately, fortunately, you know that Descartes’s Meditations – there was a book by Descartes called the Meditations – and this book gave rise to objections, with Descartes’s complete agreement. That is, a certain number of very important thinkers of the era read it and raised objections to Descartes, and Descartes answered their objections. And I don’t mean that the second and third sort of texts are less important, but I say they are all equally important, and that, in fact, the Meditations includes two other books, that are inseparable as well as the objections made to Descartes and Descartes’s responses to these objections. And, happiness of happiness! A disciple of Scotus belonged to those making objections to Descartes, that is, [Johannes] Caterus, the great Caterus, the very great Caterus, and Caterus is very poorly treated in his answers by Descartes who treats him, I dare say, it’s an abomination. [Laughter] And Caterus goes and says – and this is why I am referring to this – But you know, the old formal distinction that Duns Scotus called the formal “distinction”, this is decidedly better than what you are telling us, and this is very irritating for you [Descartes]! And so there, Descartes becomes very, very nasty, [Laughter] extremely nasty, and says that these are superstitions from the Middle Ages; the formal distinction is nothing other than having poorly understood the real distinction, and he refuses everything else, right?
Finally, I think that if Descartes can create this return to order from the viewpoint of distinctions, this is because he has two models that will allow him to do so, the two models of which he is perfectly the inventor, a geometric model and an arithmetic model. — [Deleuze turns to someone near him, perhaps his colleague in the math department, Marek] I am not saying the opposite of you, but algebra is precisely in this case, a kind of Combinatory; that is, I wouldn’t say algebra, he makes of geometry and arithmetic precisely into the Combinatory, the new Combinatory of the new arithmetic and the new geometry. This doesn’t matter, I’ll try to explain more or not explain… —
So grant me that perhaps this return to order is severe in the problems, in the mess of distinctions from the Middle Ages, the distinctions of scholasticism, [and this return to order] is made possible by Descartes’s arithmetic and geometric criteria. And what happens after? … And the whole Cartesian theory of substance is founded on the use of the three distinctions. We cannot say anything there… — It seems to me, in my view, it’s always bad to say that, you will correct it yourselves – it seems difficult to me to understand the Cartesian theory of substance if we don’t take account of the exercise of the three kinds of distinction that Descartes proposes.
And what happens after? After, there is going to be a rather diabolical operation, it seems to me, a diabolical operation. It’s that Descartes sufficiently imposed himself, notably scientifically; he has a position and it’s impossible to react directly against Descartes, not at all possible. So, Descartes’s successors are going to hold firm: fine, we are not restoring Aristotle; we don’t return to the Greeks, oh no! We don’t return to the Gothic, to the Middle Ages, oh no, no, no, no question of going back there! And under the name of Cartesian distinctions, they are in fact going to bring back the whole Middle Ages and all the Greeks, and even worse sometimes, [Laughter] even worse sometimes, that is, Spinoza [Pause] and Leibniz. What are they going to do? And this is what I will call the Baroque, the return of movement, beyond the Classical Cartesian world, the return of the process of distinctions, in kinds of discoveries with the Greeks, with Aristotle, with the Middle Ages, [Pause] but without, it seems to me, a return to, if you will.. As they moved back past, generally, back past Descartes, without returning to Aristotle and Duns Scott. The answer is nearly Leibniz.
And it’s through this that I would already like to introduce the third part. What remains for me to do is: what is he [Leibniz] going to do? How is he going to retransform all the problems of distinctions, of recreating all the distinctions, with Leibniz’s philosophy, and all the distinctions that are recreated without, however, this being a return to the Middle Ages? [Pause] And yet, he makes it entirely his own. You will see, we’ll see the next time how Leibniz, in his theory of substance, reactivates all Aristotle against Descartes, how he reintroduces all the distinctions of the Middle Ages, seeming to say, being content to say – and here he pushes his cleverness quite far – he says that Descartes was completely right, but simply he never fully understood what one must understand by real distinction! And with this pitiless argument – Descartes was right to tell us that there are three distinctions, only Descartes never understood anything about these three distinctions – [Laughter] Leibniz suppresses the most prodigious distinctions of scholastic thought, but by also renewing them thanks to what? Thanks to his very own mathematics. It’s these that give him the means, and his own mathematics, you think that I am going again to say, ah it’s differential calculus or it’s the series. No, there is something that is more important than everything, specifically – let’s look for the domain.
I am saying that the Cartesian theory of distinctions rests finally on the arithmetic and geometric instruments that Descartes forges at the same period. As for Leibniz, if he is the man of infinite series and if he is the man of differential calculus and of infinitesimal calculus, this is for a much simpler reason – I am going to be saying childish things here – for a much simpler reason that makes possible his extremely complex discoveries in mathematics. It’s because he discovers harmonics. The domain, I would say to complete this term, Leibniz’s domain is harmonics in its dual difference with the arithmetic and the geometric, such that again, I am pleading to convince you of something: it is stupid, it is desperate; [there is] no reason to believe that one can understand Leibniz, and notably a famous theory of Leibniz that is called pre-established harmony and which is at the center of all of Leibniz’s philosophy — and that we will see in the third part — if one does not question oneself on the simplest level and if one does not take seriously the term harmony. To my knowledge, Leibniz is the first philosopher who, on the level of the most rudimentary examples of mathematics, uses harmony, that is, the harmonic rapport or the mean called harmonic in distinction to the arithmetic mean and the geometric mean.
The goal for our discovery will be to help each other a bit. If I have asked several here with competence in music to consider with particular attention this problem of harmony, it’s because I have this idea in mind as having to constitute the essential aspect of our third term, but this is obviously starting from the concepts of harmony and the harmonic rapport that we will be able to create the whole of, or to assemble all the elements that we have on Leibniz’s philosophy.
So, what I want to say is that this is where we are. The next time, I still have two things left; I’ve moved forward a bit. For our return,[12] I still have to sum up a kind of presentation on substance in Leibniz, some very rapid conclusions that will be increasingly rapid, on what we must henceforth understand regarding philosophy, and then we will plunge forward into this question.

Lecture 15, 28 April 1987: “What is Philosophy?” and the Notion of Substance
[We have discussed] Whitehead, Leibniz, and so what concerned me in this confrontation was the version that Whitehead gave of a veritable exclamation, the exclamation, “Yes, everything is event”. So, you understand, I’d like for you to benefit from this also to reflect on what all this means for the philosophical enterprise. Whitehead is a great philosopher because, not that he uses the word “event” more often than another, but because he formulates an original concept that didn’t exist before him, which is the concept of event, that he thinks is capable of accounting for what? Well, for what concerns us or what happens to us. And happens to us where? In life, but also in science, but also in the arts, but also in thinking, not that all of these are the same thing, but because the components of the event are, according to him, capable of accounting for us, of making us understand its different domains and their rapports.
So what is it to be interested, if one does philosophy, what is it to be interested in Whitehead? Above all, it’s that you feel you have something in common with him; it’s telling yourself that, yes indeed, and you get what I am trying to say, it’s something that would be valid for other domains than philosophy. I could say, what does it mean to feel an irresistible interest for a particular painter or a particular musician? It’s obviously not saying that the artist is better than another, so what does this mean? It saying, yes indeed, I have something that connects with him (quelque chose à faire avec lui). Having something that connects you with Whitehead is already to have a kind of common base with him. This common base, perhaps you didn’t know that you had it before stumbling onto Whitehead. But what do I mean when I say, ah, these lines, I would like to have been worthy of writing them, or what do I mean when I say, these lines say something to me, other than that they speak from this common base that they awaken in me at the same time as they develop what Whitehead is telling you? I have a common base with Whitehead if, to some extent, I tell myself, why yes, I have always lived in this way or I have often thought in this way, that perhaps there are only events.
Inversely, what does it mean to put Whitehead aside? To put Whitehead aside, this is very simple. It no doubt means being enlivened by other problems, other kinds of problems that cause you to think, rightly or wrongly – but right or wrong, you get that we are in domains where this expression has even lost all meaning – you consider that the components of the universe or the components of thought aren’t determinable as events, but as something else, something else, which would be what? Fine, I am not saying that “everything is event” is the final expression, or was truer than another. All that we can say is that it’s an important, interesting proposition or, if you will, that it would have to have a particular weight. You could imagine units of measure, that there’s a weight to this proposition.
So, what attaches us to one philosopher rather than to another? And our whole effort here, before the Easter break, was to show that perhaps among us there are some who have no connection with Whitehead, although they are not at all doing philosophy, but they think and they live quite naturally in terms of events. What does that mean? You know, to think and live in terms of events, you understand, at once that occurs all by itself, but for someone who doesn’t come from that world, it’s strange. For at that moment, and I include myself, I was telling you, I don’t think of myself as… I no longer think of myself in terms of ego, or of subject. I think of myself in terms of events, once I say that an event is not a huge thing. I mean, it’s obvious that an event is not individuated (ne s’individue pas). There is an individuation of the event, [Pause] so therein lies a possible date for the event, a particular year this occurred, a particular day. I am saying that it goes without saying that an event’s individuation is not the [same] kind of individuation as for a person. Are you sure of being individuated as persons?
I choose this example because those who think this, what are the reasons that they think this? Those who think that they are individuated as persons, if they are philosophers, they have to construct a concept of persons or a concept of individuation that will correspond to – what to call this? – this pre-philosophical belief. And between the two, those who, in a pre-philosophical way, think of themselves to be individuated as persons and those who think themselves to be individuated as, literally, as gusts of air, of wind – a wind is not something huge –, I ask you what sense there can be in the question of who is right or wrong between the two. And furthermore, I add, I ask you, hoping that you anticipated what it means to do philosophy, I ask you: what can it possibly mean to have an argument (discussion) between the two? And I ask finally: where do these affinities come from that each of us feels for one direction or another, one vector or another that results in one author communicating something to us and another author, no less brilliant, communicating nothing, that is, remaining abstract and dead writing? It’s here, if what is philosophy has a sense, it’s from here that arises our affinity for a particular kind of concept, when we have one. It’s possible that we are horrified by the concept, so in that case, it’s an entire domain, specifically philosophy, in which we have no business, but this is also totally fine. On the other hand, someone who is not at all a philosopher, what can he/she expect from philosophy? These violent affinities that shoot through him/her, but really, are like flashes of fire sometimes when he/she says, what is he creating in a painting? And yes indeed, this was something of a [inaudible] or that has an expressible relation with a particular concept in philosophy. It’s not a question of applying [the concept]; once again, the concept has its autonomy, you know?
So I come back to arguing, arguing, and I was telling you [that] there are never arguments in philosophy. What does that mean? Nothing more than… One can always argue. In a recent witty article by Serge Daney who is the most philosophical of film critics, he says quite correctly that there have always been sites for arguing, and that’s the café (bistrot). The only thing that would be shocking is to believe that, at the end of two hours of arguing, one had done some work. One might say, I really want to relax so let’s go argue for a while; one cannot say that I really want to do some work so I am going out to argue. And I think that, as far as relaxing goes, there are always better forms for relaxing than to argue. But arguing has strictly no meaning because there are two possibilities: either the problems posed by the discussants aren’t the same, so at that point, there is no common base that would make an argument (or discussion) possible. At the outside, they can consider how that problem is not the same, and in that case, it’s not an argument. It’s a common task consisting for each of trying to specify each of their problems. Or else, the problem is the same, and there is still no place for argument. If the problem is the same, believe me, this is why it’s such a stupid idea to suggest that philosophers disagree more than others. I have never seen two philosophers pose the same problem, and they gave opposite solutions. This doesn’t exist in philosophy any more than in mathematics. What happens in philosophy are mutations of problems that anyway have the common property of not cancelling out earlier solutions to old problems, to ancient problems, but that regenerate them, that return with them toward a horizon of new problems.[2]
There are mutations of problems, indeed, but as much as in science. But simply, it’s not the same rhythm, and it’s obvious that this is not the same kind of mutation. I choose an example that will be clearer. It’s said that [concerning] the problem of knowledge (connaissance) in philosophy, there has been – I am saying some very scholarly things – there has been an empiricist solution, there has been a rationalist solution, there has been a critical, a Kantian solution, etc. You see how philosophers are different. But when I say “the problem of knowledge”, I am saying absolutely nothing. “The problem of knowledge” means nothing. What is the problem of knowledge? It starts by being creative to the extent that it poses a problem in such a manner that the problem has not yet been posed. [Pause] Let’s take an example, still on knowledge. For a long while, philosophers repeatedly tried to reach a position on the problem of knowledge with results that I could summarize as follows: how is it possible to have universal and necessary ideas? How is it possible to have necessary and universal ideas? That is, I do not have knowledge as long as I limit it to the level of contingent and particular givens. If I raise myself to necessary and universal relations, I can say then that I have knowledge (je connais).
How does one reach universal and necessary ideas, and where do such ideas come from? I can say, fine, this is a way of posing the problem of knowledge. You sense that, for example, the seventeenth century will attain a great refinement in this position on the problem of knowledge. [Pause] In other words, this comes down to saying, the given, what is given to me, is always contingent. Knowing means attaining something that goes beyond the given, notably the idea endowed with universality and necessity. Fine. I can say, good, it’s a way of posing the problem of knowledge, but there is not reason to think that it’s the only way.
It happens that in the seventeenth century, one heard some odd things. One heard this: when do I really have knowledge? I have knowledge when I myself go beyond the given – you see, this is no longer universal and necessary ideas – when I myself go beyond the given. And me, subject, I never stop going beyond what has been given to me. This is a kind of description. I go beyond what is given to me; why? But I don’t stop. I say, tomorrow the sun will rise – philosophical examples are quite simple – tomorrow the sun will rise. [Pause] By what right will it rise? By what right do I go beyond the given? What is given to me is that, since I was born, I saw the sun rise every morning, and then my father told me it was the same for him, and in books I can read that the sun rose. But I am saying something a bit different. I am saying the sun will rise tomorrow. And, tomorrow, by definition, is not given. When tomorrow is given, it has become today. Therefore, as soon as I make a statement of knowledge, I am going beyond what is given to me. Do I have an idea of tomorrow? No, I have no idea. Thus, knowing is not attaining universal and necessary ideas. Knowing is an art of going beyond the given.
Fine, I imagine an argument. The former holder of the problem of knowledge will say, so what you are in the process of defining is not the problem of knowledge. What is it? It’s belief. When you go beyond the given, you do not have knowledge; you believe. I believe that the sun will rise tomorrow. I started the argument off poorly because the other is going to answer me, but this is exactly what I mean, specifically that knowledge can only be defined as a case of belief. Every belief is not knowledge, but every [item of] knowledge is belief, is a kind of belief. The problem of knowledge becomes, under what condition is knowledge a belief? [Pause]
Fine. What do both of these have to say to each other? The problem of knowledge has changed; it’s not going to stop changing. What is it that we call a great philosopher? [It’s] someone who changes the nature of a problem. If I say “everything is event”, it’s first a handful of problems that I am tossing out. I reject a certain kind of problem; otherwise, why am I doing philosophy? In other words, the philosopher, mistakenly or correctly, is not someone who pretends to be seeking or pursuing or possessing the truth. If there were a notion that never had the slightest meaning in any domain at all, it’s the notion of true and false. But I only have one idea about this; it’s that the notion of true and false has but one application. It’s in school, and its source is uniquely pedagogical, specifically, what is true and false is the solution of a problem that you have to solve. In school, when you are given a problem, there your answer is true or it’s false. But in the life of thought, it’s not that way because problems are not pre-given. You must invent them, these problems. And in science, it’s the same: problems don’t exist. One has to invent them. If Einstein gives new solutions to certain problems, it’s because he started by inventing these problems. If Leibniz discovers infinitesimal calculus, it’s because he poses a certain type of problem that precisely could only be resolved through these procedures.[3] [Pause]
So I return to my topic as it concerns you – perhaps we will pick this up later if we have time – I return to my topic. You see, for me, what is most mysterious is this kind of, I think… In some texts that I can no longer locate – and in fact, this bothers me greatly [Laughter] – it indeed seems, from what I recall, that Nietzsche says something like this. He said, you know, concepts come to us from a strange taste (étrange goût). All of that is not true and false. When I tell you what matters in thought, it’s not true and false because true and false do not strictly exist. What matters in thought is, in fact, the importance of what one says and of what one creates, of whether it has the slightest interest. There are thoughts that, I don’t know, where it’s strikingly obvious if one poses a problem like that, but one still must pose it like that. If you don’t pose the question, “is this interesting or important, what’s being said here?”, you don’t risk answering yes. One must still ask the question. If you ask the question, “is this true or false?”, what bothers me greatly in this question is that generally what is called true are the worst platitudes. That might be a truth, an extremely striking truth, a weighty truth. The flatter it is, the more worthless it is, and the more it’s true. [Laughter] I am not making a case for the false, or I am not acting like a Sophist. I am saying something else entirely. I am saying, the categories of true and false are perhaps very suspicious categories alongside the infinitely deeper categories that are “importance” and “without importance”, “of interest” and “without interest”. And about this I am saying, so fine, if I don’t think, I feel an affinity for certain authors who can… [Deleuze does not complete this], and then for other reasons, I would perhaps not have an affinity for them because I tell myself quite suddenly, as I recall, hey, I have to go look in these texts by Nietzsche about the concept of taste in philosophy, which is a way of dissociating the concept of the values of true and of false.[4] I would have to find these texts by Kierkegaard where he says some things like that.
But those among you thinking, for example, that thought is about, no, no, that it’s about categories of true and false, at that point, they have no affinity at all with what I am saying. But God be praised, they have their own affinities. There are many philosophers, there are some very great philosophers who have thought that philosophy was about the true and the false, and we even still find them today. Fine. But I have my task. If I am saying, the real categories of thought are the important and the non-important, the interesting and the non-interesting, I must define these categories without having to reintroduce the subjects of true and false.
But I am going to remind you, what would “to argue” (discuter) mean? Each of us has so much work to do. I am saying, on one hand, we don’t have time to argue, and on the other hand, I don’t know what “to argue” means. Arguing in order to determine which is the best, thinking that knowing means having a universal and necessary idea, or even that knowing is going beyond the given through belief? Arguing about this, well, I confess that I don’t even understand what that means. Once again, one either discusses while having a common base, and so there is no place for arguing because we are in agreement from the start, we clarify, right, we clarify things. Or else there is no common base, so there is no place for arguing since one person doesn’t understand the slightest thing that the other is saying.
This is why the colloquium is truly the most comical among all intellectual activities, with its inherent character that, in fact, is a kind of fantastic enterprise where people come together to talk, talk, talk, and talk, and talk so much strictly within an absolute vacuum of any problems, since in fact, one can only argue from the outside of problems, from the outside of problems.[5] If I begin to construct my problem well, you know, at that moment then, I encounter the worst thing, people telling me, ah fine, that problem is uninteresting, without any interest. Then we can try to tell them why it is of interest, but this isn’t … [Deleuze doesn’t complete the sentence]
So, I come back and make an appeal. I am assuming that in this classroom, good, there are perhaps, there are perhaps some, I don’t know, this is what interests me, five or ten or twenty people, let’s say, for whom Whitehead has a connection. [Deleuze laughs] I am insisting on all these awkward words that I use because the question isn’t, is Whitehead the truth? It’s, do you connect with Whitehead? Does Whitehead propel you into something that, as may be the case, isn’t philosophy, but that can be either music, or art, or anything, or ethics, or whatever you like? And I can imagine quite well that you might tell me… And the same thing: do you connect with Leibniz? And if you tell me, no, I bring you a message of hope: philosophers are numerous. There aren’t that many, there aren’t that many, but there are enough of them so that someone who has no affinity for this one will have an affinity for another one. I know of no one in the world who was born a musician, I know of no one in the world who was born a philosopher, no one in the world etc., if he is aware of what music is about, even quite sketchily, or of what painting is about, or what philosophy is about. Fine.
So this is why it matters to me so much to create this lineage in which, across all its innovation, there is always Nietzsche’s expression: imagine a thinker as someone who shoots an arrow and doesn’t know where it goes. And then, another thinker has to go find it.[6] Adorno said exactly the same thing in a very lovely text. He said, well yes, in the end thinking is a bit like an activity consisting of tossing a bottle into the sea, right, and only, what someone has once thought, he said strangely, will necessarily be rethought one day. And I believe that this didn’t at all mean that it’s repeated, it wouldn’t be that. He meant something else, that it will be recreated, that it will be recreated, that is, there will be someone who picks up the arrow and sends it onward. This is exactly what happens from Leibniz to Whitehead, such that for me, the history of philosophy wouldn’t be a kind of succession, as if after Leibniz, there’s Kant, or after etc., but this would be these discontinuous paths in which Leibniz’s arrow falls, dare I say, into Whitehead’s hands, and Whitehead sends it onward. It’s your turn to pick it up if that appeals to you, and if it doesn’t appeal to you, you just leave all this. But a sky crisscrossed with arrows isn’t just nothing. It’s not simply intellectual taste; in a certain way, it’s lots of aspects of existence that come into play. I see no reason to say…  not to say that the great artists and the great philosophers belong, aren’t its entirety, but are part of our reasons for living.
So there you have it, and get this, if you come back here, if you are staying here — I can only understand this year in this way — it’s because Leibniz and Whitehead, to some extent, have something to tell you, even if for you, all that remains very unclear and very confused because understanding, you know, that’s what it is. So, of course, the more we understand, the more we know how much better it is, but the initial understanding is this kind of jolt from the arrow when you have already understood something because you connect with it, you connect. You connect as a function of the way in which you yourself live. I always choose this example: do you live like an ego (un moi), or do you live as something else? Do you live… Do you see… It’s not… It’s still not at all the same world, the one in which I am saying not only that there are events, but even that this table is an event, [Sound of Deleuze striking on the table] and an entirely other world in which I’d say, there are things, and events settle on these things like I place a sheet of paper on this table. So you are crisscrossed… In the end, what are these affinities that we have with the concept, with concepts? Fine.
So, about this, about this whole topic that we have fortunately completed, Whitehead-Leibniz, are there any questions? [Pause] Or we call on philosophy, in one sense, it’s also… Let’s come back briefly to the Whitehead example. But it’s a procedure (démarche), not at all one that I am calling scientific, but it’s no less rigorous than the most scientific procedure that might exist. At the end of examining Whitehead, if I’m told, “ok, all this is very pretty, but what is an event according to Whitehead?”, I can answer, and I am going to try to answer with three responses or three topics: an event is a concrescence of series; second, it’s a nexus of prehensions; and third, it’s an ingredience of eternal objects. You’ll tell me, this is jargon. Once again we laugh; it’s jargon exactly in the way that an abstract painting is a mishmash (de la bouillie). And ok, this is fine. Why is it fine? Because all these words mean something, and we have become capable of defining a concrescence, of defining series, of defining nexus and prehensions, of defining ingredience of eternal objects. If someone tells me, all of these are just occupations lacking the value of other occupations, like making the French economy competitive, [Laughter] I say, well, the idea of competition in the French economy is such a paradoxical idea that understanding the problem to which this idea corresponds is a philosophical operation of the highest urgency…. So, no questions?… Yes?
Question from Georges Comtesse : [The start of the question is inaudible, but it concerns putting into question Whitehead’s concept, “everything is event”] … that serves to explain or to account for or to justify what is happening, so at that point, one can no longer simply oppose the event with either the ego or the subject. For if we’ve defined the event as that which takes account or justifies, that is, the principle of reason, we also at the same time must apply the principle of reason to the ego and the subject, and try to discern both the event of the ego and the constitutive event of the subject, without remaining within the power of understanding… That is, if everything is event and if we don’t define the event of the subject or the event of the ego, then everything is not event in the “everything is event”, and there’s an exclusion. That’s where the problem lays, precisely the principle that would be directly opposed to the principle of reason.
Deleuze : I do see what you are saying.
Comtesse: I choose another example: in the essence of Nietzsche’s philosophy, for example, there is a Whitehead-type of proposition. It’s not exactly “everything is event.” [The example becomes inaudible] It’s not a question of replicating a unique world, a world of events, by a true world, but if this world is that of events, it’s a question of discerning in this world the law’s realization according to necessity, and this law’s realization according to necessity is also an event, and which he [Nietzsche] will later call the event of the eternal return. In other words, if we speak of the event, we can no longer oppose event, let’s say, to that which in the history of philosophy is what we call the great molar concepts, for example, the Cartesian I, the Hegelian subject, etc. We have to take account of events so that precisely everything would be event.
Deleuze: Absolutely, absolutely, with this nuance. [Pause] It’s that within the perspective of a philosophy of the event, you are saying overall that it has to take account, if the ego and the subject themselves are events, it has to take account of these events. So, in listening to you, I lean towards… There are so many possible paths. I can very well imagine a philosophy… Where you have said something quite correct is in saying, for example, that he maintains the principle of reason. That’s your point of departure. In my view, this is true for Leibniz, and it’s not true for Whitehead, and also what you are saying works more for Leibniz because Leibniz at the same time maintains an idea of the subject, and must take account of what this subject is. I am not certain that this is the case for Whitehead. Once again, we have seen that there are great differences between them. Umm, we don’t get there all at once, if you will; there are all sorts of steps of progression. Leibniz goes forward in a conception of the predicate-event, fine. There’s lot’s left to be done in a philosophy of the event, but not at all. Here also, one does not have to go beyond Leibniz. One must say, fine, yes, once again, it’s about picking up the arrow and trying to see where we send it.
So, it’s quite possible that in a philosophy of the event, the ego and subject no longer strictly have any sense, so there would be no place for taking account of them as event since they will no be able to exist in the least within those coordinates. Or else then, as you say, it’s a possibility. Or else then, as you say, we will have to consider them then as events, and events of a special kind, if only to reconcile two viewpoints, as events of the type belonging to the event, and there indeed, we will have to account for them. Yes, obviously, we will have account for them, but within a context such that all their components are components of events.
Such that – so, we might as well return here. I wanted to tell you this, I’ve started, as I see now. It’s begun so we might as well finish it – I’d like to tell you rather quickly because Comtesse’s question situates us fully within this. I’d like to tell you here the full situation currently in philosophy. Myself, I believe that there are two ways of doing philosophy; with this, I am pleased about what Comtesse said. He situates himself as well… Or else, no doubt, there are lots of ways of doing philosophy. I choose two among them because they are what concern me right now.
But I tell myself that it’s annoying that there’s such a difference in the very conception of doing philosophy. I would say that there’s a first conception of what it is to do philosophy that I would define by a first characteristic, specifically the abstract serves and must serve to explain. So here, I am really talking to you as in a conversation, a discussion, so, a café discussion, right? I can say, I’m not saying anything of… It’s just this: the abstract serves to explain, the abstract must explain. In fact, this is a tendency of philosophy that consists in trying to explain phenomena or that which appears through principles. These principles can be, we will explain things starting from principles, for example, the first principle, the One or Being… The One, Being, you see, it’s the first principle, [Pause] the True, lots of them. These are abstractions that explain. [Pause]
And then, without changing, always in this same conception, transcendent principles stopped being invoked, and you are going to see, in some ways, we can desire explaining through transcendent principles, but that perhaps didn’t change much, this time they explained through subjective abstracts. I mean, it was reason that was called on to explain phenomena, reason as faculty of a subject, and no longer as first principle on the side of Being. In one case, I’d say that reason is defined as a faculty of discovering principles of the intelligible. In the other case, reason is no longer at all discovered from the rational, discovered from abstract principles. Reason becomes a faculty that pursues its own ends. [End of cassette; brief break in the BNF recording]
… of Ideas, with a capital I, but it’s a faculty for realizing its own ends, and the question becomes, is reason able to realize its own ends in this world? And you see, in some ways, I’d say in both cases, whether it’s the subjective abstract or the objective abstract, the abstract is called on to explain. Is the intelligible able to explain phenomena, or else is the faculty able to explain phenomena, in one case by discovering the first principles, in the other case, by realizing its own ends? [Pause]
In these conceptions of philosophy through the abstract, I believe, in which the abstract is always something serving to explain, it seems to me that there has always been an encounter of something that causes scandal. And I was speaking of this the last time: scandal can appear in a thousand ways. Generally, let’s say, it’s, and hasn’t stopped being, the existence of evil in phenomena. [Pause] I was telling you that, in some ways, classical philosophy finds its kind of launching point (butée) with the famous earthquake of Lisbon (1755), [Pause] and there you have philosophers saying in some ways, how is this possible? How could a world present such phenomena and such a radical form of evil if it was explicable through the One, Being or Goodness? And this rings the death knell for Leibniz’s philosophy. How can one say that God chose the best of all possible worlds once one admits that this world produces the Lisbon earthquake?
On the other side, a phenomenon was produced that was no doubt even more impressive, and when we seek the explanation on the side of reason able to realize its own ends in the world, we are told that the product of the Enlightenment was what? It was Auschwitz. How is it possible to believe in a faculty of reason that would realize its own ends in the world while the coldest exercise of rationality occurred in the organization of concentration camps?[7] And if you will, I see a certain similarity between Voltaire’s reaction in relation to Leibniz that rings the death knell of the first kind of abstract, and the reaction, a truly enormous and beautiful reaction by Adorno just after the war, how is this possible, what is philosophy? Or from Jaspers, when Adorno and Jaspers pose the great post-war question, how is it possible – for one, Jaspers, in the world of the atomic bomb, for Adorno, in the world of concentration camps – to still imagine philosophy as the process of a reason that would realize its own ends in the world? [Pause] And I am saying that Adorno’s texts are splendid in this light and Jaspers’s texts as well.
That the situation then soured, when lesser talented thinkers began saying, which seems very different to me, that suddenly the concentration camps were Marx’s fault, Hegel’s fault, etc., going all the way to Kierkegaard, euh, [Pause] I don’t want to cite the author, but a recent text, nonetheless by a very admirable man, asks the question of knowing if Kierkegaard’s conception of subjectivity wouldn’t be one of the distant causes of the existence of the concentration camps.[8] Euh, there is something that is wrong here. As long as it was Adorno, the question was very specific. It wasn’t a question of saying that the concentration camps were Hegel’s fault or Nietzsche’s fault, that it’s someone else’s fault. It was a question of saying: can we maintain the conception of philosophy that we inherited from the Enlightenment, that is, of a reason that works to realize its ends in the world when we see that rationality has had as primary product the strict and rigorous organization of concentration camps? And if philosophy doesn’t ask this question, we don’t need an hour of reflection, it goes without saying. So, I am saying that what weak thinkers in France made us discover about this, or believed to have made us discover ten years ago, was Adorno’s focus – which wasn’t yet translated at that point – it was Adorno’s focus as well as the Frankfort school’s in Germany right after the war, when they were able to pose the problem in terms full of dignity and philosophical rigor. Fine.[9]
You see, I am really saying something extremely simple, assuming that there have been two conceptions of abstract principles, reason as faculty of the intelligible and reason as faculty of realizing its own ends. The second conception starts with the Enlightenment – we are really doing a bird’s eye view of history – the other is what we can call the Greco-Classical conception. And well, the two conceptions collide with something scandalous. But for me, this scandalous thing is perhaps above all that that question is poorly posed, and was this the good way of doing philosophy by starting from an abstract that was supposed to explain things and account for things? Since, at that point, this abstract was evidently going to collide with the concrete real, and the concrete real could only be the Lisbon earthquake, or could only be, worse still, the concentration camps.
And if there’s another way of doing philosophy, I am telling you here, I am saying … You will pardon me because this is, it’s like this; it’s only to … I am myself saying, this has no … I am saying, for me, philosophy has always been something else. This is why… There are a lot of authors who influenced me greatly, but that doesn’t belong to… I don’t believe that I’ve been unduly influenced by all those who relied on the abstract for explanations. This is to… And I’ve said [inaudible], and I am not at all certain to be correct, and once again, I am bracketing the abstract, [since] I indeed think that for those who believe in this conception of the abstract as explanation, this abstract is not at all abstract. But I am saying that it is abstract anyway because these are principles, right? These are principles and faculties that are confronting the real in the way it appears.
For me, philosophy has never happened in this way. For me, the abstract in its nature must be explained, and this seems to me to be the first great difference between two ways of doing philosophy. I am not at all saying that the abstract is nothing. I am saying that the abstract is itself what we must explain, the One, Being, Goodness, Reason. That’s what needs explaining. How can all that explain anything at all? [Pause] The abstract must be explained, but then, what does it mean to do philosophy if we don’t talk about the abstract? I would even say that Descartes’s “I think” is abstract, and here, all principles are abstract; everything serving as principles are abstract, objective principle or subjective principle, and for me, philosophy has never consisted of this. It consists, yes, in how to explain the abstract itself, that which is incapable of explaining anything whatsoever. Fine, philosophers are those who are make themselves responsible for explaining the abstract. How? How do we explain the abstract?
Well, I am talking about this second conception of philosophy. One must start off from experience, and I call that empiricism. You’ll tell me that I am not the first to call that empiricism, except that experience, we all know, is very difficult to find. What experience, eh? What is experience? What are experiences? Why? Because usually it’s covered over by abstractions. So, it’s very difficult to grasp the experience; one has to remove all the abstractions that cordon it off. So I even think of attempts; there have been attempts in all sorts of directions. The different empiricist philosophers have made attempts. Bergson made a famous attempt by invoking a method that he called “the method of intuition”. You see, on that side, there are no principles. These are not principles. Phenomenology – a completely different approach, [where] there’s as much diversity in this… — was seeking what Merleau-Pointy called “the savage experience”. But this is very difficult because one must be really certain that with these terms, the savage experience or something else, abstracts aren’t already slipping in. Notably, the savage experience as Merleau-Ponty defined it contains all kinds of acts that aren’t acts of reason, but that are acts of consciousness, that are an entire organization that, it seems to me, presupposes abstracts, that I am not certain deserve the name of “savage experience”. So, good, but what would this experience be? [Pause] Well, I think something very simple about this, and it’s that here there is a link between pure logic and empiricism, specifically the determination of experience is much less solid than intuition, than creating Combinatories, simply, and that there is only one exploration of what we must call multiplicities, that is, that which is freed from any principle, [such] principle being the principle of objective or subjective unification. There is only one exploration of multiplicities that can cause experience to emerge.
In other words, I believe that far from starting off from abstract principles, philosophy must proceed into cartographies, and whatever might be the given problem, creating a cartography is necessary. That is, one must trace the domain of experience to which the problem refers, these domains of experience not at all preexisting. We have to construct them, and the domain of experience is extraordinarily heterogeneous.[10] We must create the map, and for me, this is an activity, a cartographic activity that is strictly opposed to the activity of principles. [Pause] So what is this, this cartography? That is, simply, in the end, [Pause] experience is what could be called a fuzzy aggregate (ensemble flou). It’s a fuzzy aggregate, that is, a collection of disparates; we still have to choose them, the disparates. It’s in this way that there’s a Combinatory. We choose them in light of given problems. Fine.
But all this, it’s just words. A fuzzy aggregate, how does one define it? Uniquely through what occurs to it after. It’s an aggregate in which a series of consolidations is going to be produced. [Pause] Right here, I am proposing this: I define the fuzzy aggregate as an aggregate to consolidate; it’s this “to consolidate” that interests me. What I am saying is as simple as this: problem, you want to make a box. [Pause] You look for some boards. I’d say, you look for some boards, and you don’t even know how – and furthermore, you’re clumsy – you don’t even know how to put them together, and you correctly think, how can I consolidate this aggregate? Fine, you have to use nails, you know, then use a hammer, and from this, you are going to derive a box that will be an enterprise of consolidation. Fine. What does it mean to consolidate a fuzzy aggregate? Consolidating a fuzzy aggregate, I’d say, means discerning and determining the aggregate of the processes that occur in it. You see, I am not considering the question of principles. I am considering a question of processes immanent to the fuzzy aggregate. Experience, I’d say, is the aggregate of processes able to be produced in a fuzzy aggregate with the result being a consolidation of the aggregate.
There are all sorts of these processes, and they vary with the aggregates considered. I will list several of them: I’d say there are processes of unification; there are processes of centralization; there are processes of totalization; there are processes of subjectification. This is odd, you may notice, and in fact, it indeed marks the difference between the two conceptions of philosophy. What others called principles from which they started off, I myself can only find them in the state of a secondary process – thus, something else completely, these are not principles – being produced in a fuzzy aggregate in such a way that a consolidation of the aggregate results. But furthermore, these processes have no privilege – unification, totalization – and have their equivalent in abstract principles. But you see, I maintain my commitment: it’s the abstract that must be explained, and I explain it by saying that in such an aggregate, there are particular processes of unification, particular processes of totalization, and particular processes of centralization. But there are all sorts of other processes obviously, processes that resist totalization, centralization. At that point, I’d say that the components of the aggregate that define experience, components of the aggregate, must be the object of an extremely varied study according to each case.
And can we discern certain categories of these and that then would have a completely different sense than the categories in the other conception of philosophy? I believe yes, yes, that it’s possible to create a logic of aggregates of consolidation, and that this is empiricist philosophy. Thus, I’d say [that] reason has never realized its ends from above, that it doesn’t realize them, and that it collides with scandal, the concentration camps… I’d say, in what fuzzy aggregate – I am finding an example – in what fuzzy aggregate did Nazism emerge? What were the processes moving through this aggregate? What operation of unification and centralization and totalization did Nazism operate in such an aggregate? And far from being surprised that rationality could have produced the concentration camps, they are, in fact, the result of a process of rationalization exerting itself within a particular aggregate and against which we could only struggle to the extent that this aggregate included other processes.
So, I was looking; such a conception of philosophy, can I say… You see, I am summarizing this first point. About this, I could ask myself, fine, what are the empirical categories of aggregates, that is, what are the processes capable of affecting an aggregate? But everything is process, and nothing is principle. There are only processes. There is no reason as principle; there are processes of rationalization. There is no subject as principle; there are processes of subjectification. [Pause] There you are. I can say, in some ways, that all the empiricists, all the great empiricists, I could say, yes, they’ve gone in this direction, but often with many ambiguities. This is not clear, the two aspects. The two conceptions of philosophy can be highly mixed together. I’d also say that Whitehead went in this direction. For him, the idea resonated that it’s not the abstract that ought to be used to explain, but that it’s the abstract that he must explain, and the entire conception of the event stems from this. Fine.
So, I’d say – but if you remove any pretense from this; it’s really to help me create a kind of clarification here, if you will, not to reveal anything shocking – I’d say that this was what Guattari and I tried to do, and that, we called it assemblages (agencements). And we started from assemblages, and we tried to see the processes that intervened into assemblages, and we thought that we were doing philosophy, and doing philosophy in the empiricist mode. [Pause] And it was thought that no principle was valid, for example, that there was no subject; there were processes of subjectification. [Pause] And fortunately as well, there were processes at work that undid subjectifications. It was even thought that the processes didn’t stop colliding into each other, and since an aggregate can include the most heterogeneous givens, we opposed, for example, the processes of arborization to processes of rhizome, saying that this is nonetheless odd. You see, we indeed saw the difference between the two conceptions of philosophy. In the first conception of philosophy, that I am calling abstract, they have but a single image that haunts them, it’s the tree. Everything is tree, and why? Because the tree is everything that you might want, notably it’s coexistence, it’s consolidation of a process of totalization, of centralization, of unification, such that the tree is a metaphor that indeed works everywhere, the tree of knowledge, the tree everywhere, it’s the tree. We are even told that the brain is a tree.
And we ourselves said with, I believe, great conviction and, moreover, being very sure that we were right, we said, but no, the brain is not a tree; it’s grass. [Huge laughter] What did that mean? That meant something quite important. That meant that you use a model that is the tree without ever placing it into question and that it’s an absolutely abstract model, whereas trees are processes of nature, agreed, and if you don’t confront them with other processes, for example, with the processes of rhizome, the rhizomes are not trees, well then, rhizomes are not at all processes of unification. On the contrary, they are processes of dissemination, processes of junctions of disparates, it’s all that you’d like. Fine, I am telling you all that, but it was the whole meaning of our attempt, and in this sense, I believe that it was going toward the side of a certain tradition of philosophy that was violently opposed – well, not violently! – which was opposed to the other conception of philosophy. And I believe that here, I am saying this poorly. I am doing it almost on purpose to express myself at this level, if I can, of the most obvious language (langage le plus courant).
And so, I think of Foucault, and I tell myself, in some ways, I’d tend to say that Foucault was completely on the side of the empiricist conception. For him, he called that apparatuses (dispositifs). [Pause] Simply, a curious confusion occurred because Foucault allowed himself once to argue, and the one time he allowed himself to argue was with the Frankfort school, and notably with Habermas, a descendant of the Frankfort school. So that people believed that Foucault was posing the same problem as the Frankfort school, and just as the Frankfort school had asked the question, how can reason as pure faculty have engendered, one way or another, the concentration camps, so too Foucault had asked an analogous question, how could reason as faculty of the Enlightenment have engendered the great milieus of incarceration, the prison, etc., or the psychiatric hospital. And in my opinion, this was all to the good because that [argument] enriched everyone, and the Frankfort school used Foucault, but that wasn’t at all his thought. His thought was to start from experience, a very strong logical empiricism that opposed completely the other conception of philosophy; doing the analysis of what he called apparatuses, that is, discerning the processes, and not the principles, discerning the processes in action within a particular apparatus, processes of centralization, of totalization, etc., and the processes of resistance to these processes, processes of resistance that perhaps were primary in relation to those that they resisted; processes of flight, processes of, well, processes of resistance. [Pause]
So there, I mean, if it was true that there were two ways of doing philosophy, the first characteristic of these two ways, of these two direction, one would consist… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence] And then here as well, there are affinities, there are affinities. For all of you, I am trying to say, either you find yet other conceptions, or you are going to have confidence in principles, and you are going to watch with the greatest attention what a principle becomes when it is realized or accomplished in the world. And I announce to you that you will be the man of scandal, with what that risks at times. What brings a danger is that this scandal is something trumped up because you will be surprised by a thing that was understood from the start, specifically that the world doesn’t obey pure reason. Or else, you will be tempted by the other path, that is, this philosophical cartography that consists in defining aggregates in which processes exert themselves.
Second characteristic to oppose the two philosophies: [Pause] I’d say in a first case, in the first case, philosophy is the search for the universal and the necessary. [Pause] Of course, this isn’t a question of making them say nonsense, since these are great philosophers. It’s not a question of a universal or of a necessary in fact. It’s not a question of saying, for example, all men are alike, no. Philosophy has always presented itself as a search for a universal and a necessary by right (de droit). Kant wrote on this point, definitively, what is universal and necessary by right itself – and this is required since it’s in the name of principles. It’s well understood that the world does not achieve by itself and spontaneously the universal and the necessary. So, it’s a question of a universal and a necessary by right about which one wonders under what conditions it [philosophy] could be realized in the world. [Pause] But if all philosophy is defined by the art of concepts, I’d say that in this first conception of philosophy, the concept is the universal and the necessary by right. [Pause] For example, we will be told that human rights are the universal and the necessary by right, [Pause] and we will be told that since Kant, the philosopher has been the guardian of human rights. [Pause] I’m going fast, because otherwise… It’s just so you…
And the other conception of philosophy, I believe, occurs… is very, very different. It says, no, a concept has nothing to do with the universal and the necessary by right because [Pause] a concept is an object of a creation and not one of discovery. [With] the universal and the necessary by right, you see how these connect back to the preceding difference. The universal and the necessary by right are either the pure intelligible as principle, the One, Being, etc., or else [Pause] the subject as pure activity, that is, reason as pursuit of its own ends, the reasonable subject. Thus, it’s either rationality or else reasonability. [Pause] At that point, in fact, in such a conception, philosophy is the arbitrator of true and false. The true is what is universal and necessary by right. My only remark is that this doesn’t go very far. It’s odd. It doesn’t go very far because we immediately fall upon scandal, once again, the scandal being that the universal and the necessary by right do not stop being buffeted by the concrete real and its conceptual presentation being rather quickly completed.
We have seen this, and that’s why what we’ve done is so useful for me. I am saying that a concept is not at all about determining a universal and necessary by right. A concept is what?[11] It’s a system of singularities. What am I calling singularity? The little that I have said allows me now to define it in more common terms. I understand fully that some more fully developed philosophical definitions are necessary, an attempt we have undertaken from the viewpoint of Leibniz all this year. But I am saying that it’s an aggregate of singular points, it’s an aggregate of singularities, and if I am trying to define these singular points quite superficially uniquely with what I have just said, I’d say that singularities are precisely that which marks out the start and finish of a process operating in an aggregate, in an aggregate of consolidations. [Pause] So, if in an aggregate you follow the trail of a process of centralization, you have a singularity, or perhaps even two, or perhaps even three or four because these can bifurcate. If you take, if you follow a process of dissemination, you have other singularities. The aggregate of singularities that will correspond to an aggregate will be called a concept, or a part of the aggregate will be called a concept. [Pause] I’d say that, far from this being the universal and the necessary that define the concept, it’s the singularity. If you do not produce concepts that might be emissions of singularities, you are not doing philosophy, at least according to this second conception. Thinking is not meant for discovering the universal and the necessary. Thinking is for emitting singularities and hence – here as well, I feel myself being Nietzschean, notably… or Mallarmean – it’s to produce a dice throw, if you assimilate the points on the die to singularities. From this viewpoint, it’s no longer a question of true and false. A dice throw can be a winner or a loser; it’s not true or false. A dice throw can be important if your existence depends on it. It can be unimportant if you just do it like that, mechanically. But I’d say that the concept in this second conception is the second characteristic that opposes the two conceptions of philosophy, the concept as singularity.
And here, obviously then, I’d like for someone to raise an objection for once, you understand, in order to show you the extent to which there’s a… [Deleuze does not complete this] Someone might tell me, well yes, but we see that you could care less about law, and that you only recognize facts. The mere effort to imagine this objection already wearies me so much [Laughter] that I am exhausted because it’s awful, so you understand? Put yourself in my place, with somebody telling me that. On one hand, on the other (tantôt, tantôt) here as well, [since] this depends on mood, it depends on mood, but may God act so that mood is not only a psychological given, but a philosophical one. If I am in a bad philosophical mood, I say, that’s how it is, buddy, that’s it, so long, see ya. [Laughter] If I am in a good philosophical mood, — and besides, this isn’t good; one must not be in a good philosophical mood – what am I going to try to explain? I am going to try to explain that law is not such a simple matter as that, that law is very, very complicated to undertake, and notably, I am saying, here as well then, [it’s] our affinities, always bearing the deepest mystery of ourselves, that is what we… This is nothing compared to when one wonders how a woman can pursue the same kind of man in her intimate life or how a man can pursue the same kind of woman in his intimate life, something that doesn’t always happen, but sometimes it does. But this is nothing compared to the deeper philosophical idea, on which the other depends, our affinity with ideas. What happens for me to connect with an idea?
So finally, law, law, I return to the law. Let’s assume that among you, all of you are interested in the law. I doubt that, but anyway we can pretend, that a certain number among you are interested in it. But the law means nothing. What in the law are you interested in? What interests you in the law and in what is not the law? For generally, when I’m interested in something, it’s above all because there’s something dwelling in this something that doesn’t belong to the something. I seem to being creating an opening to psychoanalysis, but I’m not opening up psychoanalysis [Laughter] since this something is precisely what we have just called an idea.[12] Fine. But I don’t know; if I am assuming that you are interested in law, what interests me in law? I am going to tell you: a single thing interests me finally in the law, and it impassions me, and if I were to stop being a philosopher, that’s what I would have done for a career, the law, to create… But not to create just anything at all; [it’s] to create jurisprudence. You know generally what jurisprudence is. It’s the juridical acts that concern the application of a law when its application is problematic, that is, when one doesn’t know which law to apply. The legislator, how every skillful he may be, isn’t expected to have foreseen everything, and the evolution of law can only occur… or perhaps, I don’t know. No, I am already saying too much; perhaps the evolution of law occurs in part through jurisprudence.[13]
So there’s a very beautiful example of jurisprudence. I follow these [cases] very closely; I even cut them out of the papers when there’s a jurisprudence case that really attracts me, and the more insignificant it is… [It’s] in the recent stories about alcoholic drivers, right? [Laughter] But there’s a very interesting case. A prosecutor told himself, ah well, let’s piss them off (les faire chier), these alcoholic drivers, and this created a problem in law. How? How to go about this? He told himself, let’s take a look at whether we can’t equate the car that plowed into some pedestrian, if we can equate it to a weapon. – Ah, this thrills me; the problems thrill me. This is so much lovelier than crossword puzzle, and it raises all kinds of problems. – Can it [the car] be equated to a weapon? If so, the car can be confiscated since, in our system of law, in fact, the car can be confiscated from the start of the inquiry, independently of any judgment, since weapons linked to a particular crime are confiscated. If I kill someone with the gun that I borrowed from you, the gun gets confiscated as part of the inquiry’s evidence. So, if the car is equated with a crime, fine, here’s a beautiful case of jurisprudence. [Pause]
An indecent act (outrage à la pudeur). This [law] is difficult to apply. It’s a very complex notion, right? It’s coming back more frequently because more things in this domain are occurring. Right? I’d like, I’d really like to write to [Charles] Pasqua [Minister of the Interior, 1986-1988] [Laughter] because I’d give him some advice. During the Vichy government, they wanted to apply… They had first created… No, it must have dated from just before the war, but it was interpreted in the form of an indecent act toward others, for example, exhibitionism creates an indecent act, an act harming your sensibilities (pudeur). But you know then, there was a jurist during Vichy… [End of cassette; brief interruption of the BNF recording]
… He wasn’t able to. He said, there’s certainly an indecent act against one’s own sensibilities. So, he said that striptease – there already was striptease – [the case of] striptease. The jurists objected, how can striptease be condemned since we cannot call this an “indecent act” since the audience is consenting and they are paying for it, and this is opposed to other determinations of indecent acts? And the jurist said, well, be careful, it’s not at all like that. The woman undressing in public is inflicting harm to her own sensibilities. You see? The indecent act took on a whole different dimension. Henceforth, they could condemn it. That’s very interesting. 
There’s an example that I cite all the time, so excuse me for repeating it – I am going quickly for the ones I cite often, that is, each time I talk about the law, because this one really thrills me. — It goes way back when the question was being asked, could one smoke in taxicabs, or not? Law suits occurred because of the first taxi drivers who refused to accept smokers and announced this, as there are always people prone to sue – the French are very prone to have lawsuits; there’s always a few people with a lawyer and lots of time to waste who say, so I am going to sue you, you don’t have the right. — And the smokers went on to win their lawsuit, at the start. [Laughter] And why did they win their lawsuit? Because the preceding jurisprudence was quite simple: the preceding jurisprudence had equated hiring a taxi with a rental, [like] renting an apartment. You rent, you create a rental contract with the taxi driver wherein you have the right of use and abuse of your rental, with the proviso that you are liable to the landlord’s laws, that is, no degradation, etc. That’s what the result was. It’s a rental, so there’s no question of forbidding someone from smoking at home. And then, this was a rear-guard movement because… But how were they able to balance out this matter, forbidding people from smoking in cabs? Solely through an essential juridical change. It was necessary for taxis no longer to be equated with a rental contract and for taxis to be equated with a public service rather than with a private rental. With the public service status, it is perfectly legal for a public service to issue its rules, in its rule, forbidding smoking, as well as in buses and metros. So it was necessary for jurisprudence to evolve, what I call an evolution of jurisprudence, through which taxis are no longer equated with an apartment, but equated with… [Deleuze does not complete this]
To return to the apparently much more serious questions like human rights, I think [that] it goes without saying, since 1789, human rights have undergone mutations as considerable, as enormous as this insignificant taxi story. And I am saying something very simple; I am hypothesizing – [if] I’d had to create a course on law, I think I’d devote myself to this completely. For me, I’d say that jurisprudence is not simply a juridical process destined to resolve difficult cases. This is the origin and finality of law. It’s the creative act of law. It’s not the law that creates jurisprudence; it’s jurisprudence that creates law. You see why this both pleases me and why… But I believe in this independently of that; so I would have studied history, for example, of Roman law…. — Anyway, I am pointing out, because it’s been a long while since I’ve read it, there is a very great jurist from the end of the nineteenth [century] who was enormously interested in the role played by jurisprudence in the elaboration of law and was called, with a very lovely name, who was called Salé [salted, in French] – he is unfortunately quite forgotten – Salé, and the great Salé, would entirely go along with – perhaps we have to force this a bit – saying that the origin of law is jurisprudence itself.
See what I mean and why I am doing this development, this all too long development? It’s because law itself proceeds by emissions of singularities: the taxi, private rental, public service, there we have a triangle of singularities. Which side will it be on? Does the taxi lean toward the side of private rental, on the side of the singularity of private rental, or does it slide over to the side of the public service singularity? I’d say that jurisprudence is the emission of juridical singularities or of singularities linked to juridical processes so that even the concept of law – it’s why all this is of such great interest to me – even the concept of law isn’t a concept of necessity and universality, whereas it was nonetheless the concept that we were given as the most convincing from this perspective. On the contrary, it’s a concept that perfectly validates the definition: every concept is an invention and a grouping of singularities.
Finally, there would be a third conception, and third difference rather, between the two conceptions, but here, I wouldn’t have… This would be a radical conception of the philosophical rapport with science, art and politics. [Pause] And I believe that the other conceptions, even when they don’t say it, even when they don’t recognize it, maintain a certain conception about philosophy according to which philosophy would consist, in whatever sense you might take the word, of reflecting on universals and on law, of possessing a power of reflection. To the extent that it [this power] proposes to realize itself in the world, it proposes at the same time to reflect on the means and obstacles of such a realization, this realization occurring in art, in science, etc. Hence, the concepts of the first mode of philosophy were fundamentally reflexive. [Pause]
I personally hate any reflexive philosophy because that deprives it of being like all other disciplines, that is, a discipline of creation, and I proclaim this very strongly because I believe that this is what philosophy has to invent, and it invents concepts with the desire that the concepts it invents will be as beautiful as the paintings a painter creates, as the music a musician creates, or the discoveries that are equally creations made by a scientist (savant). As a result, between philosophy and science, there is no relation of reflection. The great principle of any discipline is that those who practice this discipline are entirely adequate for reflecting on it when they want to or when they are able to. Once again, it’s no discovery to say that those who have reflected best on cinema are the filmmakers who have undertaken to make them and who have enjoyed reflecting about them. The most beautiful texts on architecture are texts by architects. The most beautiful texts on painting are texts by painters. This goes so much without saying that we’re ashamed to say such things. Therefore, if philosophy proposed to reflect about whatever subject it might be, well then, its days would be so sad that I wonder who would need it at all.
On the other hand, on the other hand, it has its own work to do on itself, and the problem – and here’s the mystery – is that philosophy can produce important concepts only when they have a certain mode, not one of resemblance, but when they have a certain mode of correspondence with the functions of science, with works of art. [Pause] As a result, through the rapport with science, the question of philosophy has always been never to reflect about science, but always to create the metaphysics that corresponds to the science of a particular era. Let no one tell us that metaphysics was fine for the science back in the old days. During the period of ancient science, there was a metaphysics corresponding perfectly to this ancient science. Well, just as Bergson wanted it, it’s up to philosophers to create the metaphysics corresponding to modern science. We must take literally Bergson’s great text. Once again, he says something quite simple: what defines – he speaks very quickly – he says, what defines generally ancient science? It’s that it defines movement with reference to privileged positions; it selects privileged positions out of movement. What defines modern science? It’s that it defines movement with reference to any instant whatever (l’instant quelconque). [Pause] Ancient metaphysics created exactly the metaphysics of ancient science, specifically, how is it possible that it defines privileged positions? What do they consist of? Where do they come from? This was doing the metaphysics of science. Bergson believes himself to open up the metaphysics of modern science when he says… [Deleuze does not complete this], a conception of time is necessary to account for the time reference of any instant whatever, and he answers, my conception of duration, far from being opposed to science, constitutes the metaphysics of this science. Duration is precisely the metaphysics that refers to the movement connecting to any instant whatever.[14]
Final point for distinguishing the two kinds of philosophy: I’d say there is a philosophy that always linked itself to the eternal, the eternal by right, etc., but at the same time that it became the metaphysics of modern science, philosophy was led more and more to change problems and to pose the opposite question, of what is the emergence of something new. And that seems to exist fully with Whitehead, with Bergson. That appears for me with Whitehead when he says, the problem is one of creativity. The problem is the emergence of the new.
But I can say that this was a bit what I wanted to tell you. This is linked to everything we are doing on Leibniz because I’d like for you to sense that Leibniz seems to me – if you’ve accepted this kind of grand distinction, these ways of, these two ways of doing philosophy – Leibniz seems to me strangely at the hinge point for both of them. There are all sorts of elements… And this is required! All of us are like this! All of us are deeply incoherent, all. We hold onto something from a tradition, and then we enter into something new. We never stop having, of being unbalanced. And in Leibniz, I’d like for you to be open both to the extent to which he enters into the entire stream of traditional philosophy, so-called traditional, and how at the same time he brings about such innovations, euh, such innovations that the future of philosophy flows through him.
So, that’s what I wanted to tell you, in this way, to see what you think of this, this mystery. I myself feel, you know, extremely… In philosophy, I believe that… First, it’s very different according to whether I’m speaking to philosophers or to non-philosophers. Philosophers owe it to themselves to have read almost – not immediately, since this takes time – to have read almost all the great philosophers. That’s not difficult because, you know, there’s not a huge mass of great philosophers, right? That’s not a heavy load in the end. [Laughter] If we say a good dozen, that’s already not so bad, so it’s not an infinite task. That doesn’t mean one has to wait sixty years to be a philosopher, but still to have read them more or less… But non-philosophers are something else entirely. But where they link together, philosophers and non-philosophers, everything that I’ve just said is a concept of philosophy, — and it’s through this that it matters for me, — where philosophers and non-philosophers are equal and are strangely linked to a kind of task in common.[15]
What I mean is that in any event, you will have your attractions, and this is, for me… You will have your kinds of affects, the philosophical affect, the philosophical affect that makes you say, for example, that makes you say this also for literature or poetry, ah yes, that writer, not that he belongs to my family (est des miens), but I belong to his (je suis des siens), I belong to his family, and perhaps if we discovered this, whatever strikes me in this way, but that’s in fact the problem. And so, strange things can occur, and for a long while you might not be reacting. I mean, two kinds of reading are necessary; two kinds of rapports are necessary with philosophy. Becoming a philosopher is not about suppressing the non-philosophical rapport with philosophy. Philosophy is nothing if it isn’t capable of inspiring a non-philosophical rapport, that is, a rapport that it has with non-philosophers as non-philosophers. To think that philosophy has a rapport with non-philosophers in order to make philosophers out of them seems to be itself an atrocity. It’s not a question of this. Simply, and what is even more complicated, two things are necessary: the non-philosopher must have a rapport with philosophy, but in which he/she keeps his/her quality of non-philosopher. And the philosopher must also have with philosophy a rapport in which he/she can maintain his/her quality and virtue as non-philosopher. It’s only in this way, I believe, that we can pose the problem of a non-philosophical rapport with philosophy.
So there you have what I had to tell you on this point. Do you have any things, euh, any reactions at all? I can very well imagine that you might tell me that two conceptions aren’t really a lot, euh, but these are not so much conceptions as practices. If you will, as regards certain people, I have the impression that as regards these questions of practices, they don’t have the same practices as me, and me, I don’t have the same practices as them, and that it would never occur to me to say or be able to say that they are wrong and that I’m right. It’s really, I tell myself, but ok… This is why these are questions of practices and not questions for discussion, you understand. So here, yes, in any way, in any manner that might exist, yes, I cannot tell you… I know that among you, there are some who aren’t philosophers and yet come here to listen. Understand, I believe that one of the reasons that they come here is that they feel, in any case in my heart, I have never wished for them to become this [philosophers] since I consider that their becoming can be entirely other and that if they take philosophy into this becoming, that will not be in order for them to become philosophers, but in order for them be able to use philosophy in a different way, and that’s splendid, that will be really, really great.
So here we are, what do you think of all this? For me, yes, [if] I would have done a course on “what is philosophy?”, I would have developed it fully. You understand that myself, I’m a bit vexed by the absence lately – and I must even say that this is in authors of genius like Heiedegger, who considered what is philosophy and all that – and I don’t find any practice. I indeed find a style, I indeed find all kinds of things, I find a great style, I find a great thought, but a practice of the concept, that is, what precisely is a concept? And I assure you, I read and re-read Hegel – well, I don’t read him that much [Laughter] – but knowing what a concept is practically, I fully understand that he never stops saying what a concept is theoretically, but what a concept is practically, once we’ve said that Hegel is never satisfied with telling us it’s something that works in threes, thesis, antithesis, synthesis. Nonetheless, this is greater than that. But I am struck in Heidegger that I see no practice of the concept, etc. I am telling you that if I have any value, I certainly tell you, let’s call a concept an aggregate of singularities, and that’s what a practice is. Here’s how we can do it: constructing an aggregate of singularities, that’s what one does with… etc. Are there any disciplines that consider this? None consider this, none. Yes. Do you have some things to add ?
Question:  [The details of the question are rather indistinct.][16]
Deleuze: Here I believe in this completely, I believe in this very strongly. One must give them a status, I believe. I cannot do so because that calls on… Here I’d look for the status of what you are asking; I would look for it on the level of concepts, that is, of singularities. There are singularities that, euh, or groups of singularities that are absolutely transportable and that are not universals because they have no existence outside the locations where they are transported, and you suddenly find, in fact, you find… Let’s take the Leibniz-Whitehead example. This is what I will call, if you will, grafts (des greffes). There are grafts of concepts, and grafts of concepts that are not done out of cleverness (coquetterie) or out of… For example, Whitehead makes a graft of Leibniz’s concepts, yes, yes, almost each time… These are transports, if you will, transports that hardly need to be modified.
Really, and that, that occurs all the time, that is, we have to say it’s beautiful expression that I’m quoting here – these are like summaries, all this – that I have quoted a lot because it appeals to me. It’s a beautiful formulation of words. You … Understand what I mean because [Deleuze coughs and swallows with great difficulty] I was telling you that it’s not a question of making fun of philosophy’s taste for giving birth to words because when it invents concepts, it has a choice of only two procedures: either to take an actual word by virtue of its etymology and recharge it in order to have it take on the meaning required by the concept. For example, Bergson takes an entirely actual word, duration, in order to draw something from it that the word had never designated. So what is better as a method? Either other philosophers who themselves use and invent a word as, for example, Heidegger does, as German philosophers have often been known to invent a word, rather than revitalizing an actual word. The French prefer to revitalize an actual word, but as for Whitehead, he’s more on the side of inventing – concrescence, ingression, etc., all that.
But this was linked to… Now, I don’t know what the question was; I started off on this to say… In the graft of concepts… Ah yes! I was saying that there’s an expression from [Charles] Péguy that seems to me very, very good, and one that philosophy had to appropriate. So, here it was a graft; there it was the word Aternal (Internel), that [with] the word Aternal, he designated something that is neither temporal, nor eternal. So, notice that in order to designate something that’s neither temporal, nor eternal, Nietzsche had already constructed his concept, that of the Untimely (Intempestif). I find Untimely better than Inactual because Untimely, Inactual entirely have Nietzsche’s active, dynamic, polemical aspect. So, it was the Untimely that arrives in an era against its era. He defines the Untimely exactly: what comes at a present moment against the present in order to prepare – and I add, modestly, I hope for – a future. It was a kind of disturbance of the era. And the Aternal in Péguy is something that is interior to the horizontal line of time, but that testifies in some ways to its encounter with another dimension, as something that has come from elsewhere. So, in the end, at the extreme, in Péguy, there is no eternal, there’s only the Aternal.[17]
So I’d say, we could very well say, in the direction that you state, in fact, these grafts of concepts are not the eternal, these are not the historical, no. These would either correspond exactly, whereas you make the connection with Baudelaire, here this wouldn’t be bad in fact to make the connection, the correspondence at this point, either with Nietzsche’s Untimely or with Péguy’s Aternal. But I completely agree with this phenomenon of grafting. I hadn’t thought about this with Baudelaire, but you are completely correct. He is fully within in this, and into a new kind of rapport between thought and painting. Historically we understand what is happening in painting at that period, something not happening in fact in philosophy, the need for a mode of thinking… Yes, it’s completely… Yes, yes… Anything else? [Pause] It’s up to you to be asking. Obviously my concern is that, have I exaggerated, have I… euh? As regards the other conception, the one I don’t care for, have I captured it or not? It seems I haven’t, it seems I haven’t. [Pause] Fine! Well then… There you have it! There we are! How about a bit of a return back to Leibniz? [End of the cassette; brief interruption of the BNF recording]
In conclusion, therefore, there remains for us in this second part to derive a kind of comparative study of a notion that has played a role in philosophy, specifically the notion of substance, and among other things this year, I’d like for you to leave here with a few clearer ideas than you’ve had on substance.[18] Perhaps then, substance is precisely a rather fine case of [something] that comes to support what I am saying. It’s not a concept that has existed forever. [Pause] We have to take account, we have to consider the difference between the use of the term itself and its development into a concept. So, in Greek, in fact you have an equivalent of substance, since substance comes from Latin, and substance is that which holds itself under (ce qui se tient sous). [Pause] So, my examination doesn’t consist in saying when the Greek word appeared for the first time, but it does consist in saying – it’s more superficial – when do we consider that someone is truly proposing to constitute a concept of substance? And I believe that it’s not an exaggeration to say that there were some predecessors, and indeed it’s Aristotle. [Pause] Do you find this in Plato? [Pause] It seems not. We can’t affirm this. I really don’t see it, no, not really.
Why can I say that it’s with Aristotle that the concept of substance appears? Because Aristotle offers two very solid characteristics – let’s go back, two singularities, two singularities. [Pause] And starting from Aristotle, the question isn’t if you agree or not, but you have no choice. Either you use another word, or you accept it in this sense, unless you provide very important reasons to change it. He kept the sense of the word. If you will, there is nonetheless a rigor in all his uses of the word, and the two characteristics are as follows: substance – I am not stating definitions, right, these are characteristics – substance designates a something concrete, determined, and individual. It’s something concrete, determined, and individual. [Pause] You see immediately why he brings forth the concept of substance against what has been Plato’s grand concept, of Idea, with a capital I. [Pause] Substance is something concrete; as Aristotle said, oh well, no, Plato, that’s still way too abstract; let’s go back to the concrete. Substance is something concrete, it’s something determined, it’s something individual. It’s that which is, that is, that which we translate correctly with Be-ing (l’étant), with [Greek word], it’s Be-ing, the participle of the verb “to be”. Or again, he says: the something right here (le quelque chose que voici). I am saying that substance is the individual concrete. [Pause]
Notice that if I am now jumping to another great philosopher of substance, Descartes, I am jumping to him because we are going to see Leibniz’s very complex condition both in relation to Descartes and in relation to Aristotle. So, Aristotle and Descartes are going to be Leibniz’s two points of reference. If I jump to Descartes, I find the same thing. If you read Descartes’s Principles – let me point out book 2, paragraph 11 – this is a very interesting text where he tells us, substance is not extension (étendue) in general, it’s a stone, this stone, or something else. [Pause] Moreover, he doesn’t stop saying [that] when we conceive of extension, we cannot separate it from some body, from any body whatever, from a particular body whatever, even if this body is perceived in a confused way. [Pause] At this point, this means that between Aristotle and Descartes, there is no difference. There’s no need telling you that Leibniz will again state this more strongly. Substance is the individual. Substance is individual. [Pause] It’s something completely determined. It’s the individual concrete. Moreover, he will take all his precautions since [given] what occurred to the two others, he will say, there is no other substance. [Pause] Substance is individual, and there is no other substance than the individual.
Second characteristic: substance, that which holds itself under, is the subject of inherence, it’s the subject of inherence, [Pause] that is, it’s a subject such that it cannot be attributed to any other subject. [Pause] If you say, man is reasonable, you attribute reasonable to man, but you can still attribute man to another subject. For example, Socrates is a man. Socrates, who is the someone right here (le quelqu’un que voici), can no longer be attributed to anything. It’s the final subject; and through this, it’s the subject of inherence. [Pause] Henceforth, how are the predicates of the subject – qualities, dimensions, colors, etc. – defined? It’s what is present in the subject. We will therefore distinguish the subject or final subject, that which can only be subject, from what is present in the subject. If I say, the table is white, white is present in the table. This table, this table right here [Deleuze strikes on the table] is white; white is present in this table. The subject is therefore a subject of inherence since the predicate is in the subject and being inherent is being present within.
For Descartes, substance is said to be subject of its own determinations. [Pause] Everything that refers to substance as subject, and well, no tiny bit of all that, of what refers to it, can exist or subsist without the subject. It’s inherent to the subject. Modes and attributes are inherent to the subject. [Pause] Here, among the numerous Cartesian definitions of substance, there is one that seems particularly interesting to me: substance is a thing, res, in which – in which, you see the inherence – a thing in which exists formally and eminently that which we conceive of, a thing in which exists that which we conceive of. What do “formally” and “eminently” mean? It matters little. Formally is, in the same form; eminently is, in at least a superior form. [Pause] For example, I can say that thought being God formally and that extension being God eminently, that is, in a form superior to the body’s extension. Fine.
There’s no point saying, as we’ve seen it, that Leibniz takes this up, and not only takes it up, but takes it onward to a point that has never been seen, this requirement that substance be the subject of inherence. We saw that this was the entire theory of predication. The predicate is in the subject.[19] This very expression of truth in Leibniz has a reference. And we’ve seen that Leibniz will draw very particular things from this, yes, but sometimes he does so a bit coyly… To some extent, he is coy about… When he tells us, every predicate is in the subject, there are a certain number of texts where he says either, “as everyone recognizes” or else, “as Aristotle said”. And Leibniz slides that into texts where neither Aristotle, much less “everyone”, ever drew from inherence the consequences that Leibniz derives from it. [It’s] his ways of pretending that all of this just goes completely without saying, and what he is saying, what’s extremely paradoxical, goes so much without saying, at least everyone says so, well yes, the predicate is in the subject, everybody has always said this, only you’ll see what I derive from this. And you understand, it’s the same thing; I am asking, what causes Leibniz to derive from this the most paradoxical effect whereas, apparently, he is merely taking especially seriously the two characteristics that were recognized in substance since Aristotle and that Descartes proposed, specifically being an individual concrete and being a subject of inherence? What occurs that causes Leibniz to conclude something that’s neither in Aristotle nor in Descartes, that is, thereby renewing the concept of substance?
It’s because something very disturbing occurred. [Pause] What was so troubling for [inaudible] that occurred in Aristotle? In Aristotle, and in light of the two preceding remarks, Aristotle introduced some distinctions. He said, well take care, we must distinguish what is (ce qui est) in a subject from what is affirmed (ce qui est affirmé) about a subject. [Pause] What is in a subject, is what? Here we see, what is in a subject is the accident, and it’s odd. He is in the process of introducing a nuance into… [End of the cassette; interruption of the BNF recording]
… Man is reasonable : here, the predicate is not in a subject. It’s not what is in a subject; it’s what is affirmed about a subject, that is, it’s the essence. We will therefore distinguish accidents that are in the subject and the essence about which we do not say it’s in the subject, but that it’s affirmed about the subject. [Pause] This is what the Latins — essence, according to these terms, these are translations of Aristotle’s terms — and it’s what the Latins will call quiddity, quiditas, that is, the what (ce que), the what the thing is (ce que la chose est). The accident is, if you will, the how the thing is: the thing is white, the thing has such a size, but what the thing is, that’s its essence or its quiddity. So, I can say that the table has two meters of length, and is white. These are present in the subject. But if I say the table is a rectangular or square surface placed on four feet, that’s what the table is. It’s not in the subject; it’s affirmed about the subject as its essence. It’s the subject’s quiddity.
Within all this, what remains there of Be-ing (l’étant)? [Pause] It’s that essence introduces the necessary and the universal. [Pause] Being a flat surface on four feet is necessary for the table. There is a rapport of necessity whereas in being white, [there’s] none at all. From the rapport of necessity, colors have a rapport of universality. All tables have this essence, which leads Aristotle to say – and this is why it’s not present or contained in the subject, but is affirmed about the subject – which leads Aristotle to tell us, quiddity or essence can be called second substance (substance seconde). [Pause] And you see that this second substance is going to be truly annoying since it has neither of the two characteristics of the primary substance. The primary substance was individual through its essence, and it was the subject of inherence through its essence. [Pause]
In Descartes, he arrives at the grand affirmation very quickly: substance is defined not through its modes, but through what its modes assume. It’s defined through its essential attributes – oh, excuse me, I’m made a mistake – it’s defined by its essential attribute since a substance has only one essential attribute, otherwise it would have several essences. For example, what is the body’s essence? The body’s essence is extension. What is the mind’s essence ? The mind’s essence  is thought. [Pause] But you see the same reversal as in Aristotle, something that’s quite annoying, but specifically that the first two characteristics are placed into question again through the viewpoint of essence. It’s that extension as essence of the substance-body is necessarily linked to the body and so corresponds to all bodies, [Pause] such that, at the extreme, one would have to say that individual bodies are no more than modes of the essential attribute, extension, that they’re manners of extension.
In short, I am summing up. Descartes and Aristotle start off… What I am saying is obviously very much a summary; I… In general, I’d say that Descartes and Aristotle start off by assigning two important characteristics to substance, individuality and the subject of inherence, but they are led, a second point, they are led to establish an essence that is going to place these two characteristics into question. The essence is no longer what is, Be-ing (l’étant); it’s what the thing is, what the Be-ing is. And well, here we see that the what, what the Be-ing is, is going to place into question the individuality of Be-ing and Be-ing as subject of inherence. For what Be-ing is, is essence; essence is not inherent to the subject. It’s the essential attribute [of the subject] or what is affirmed about the subject, not that which is present. And on the other hand, it is applied to an open collection. [Pause] It’s no longer this very table. It’s the infinite series of tables. Good. Such that one often gets the impression – this is why in Descartes as well as in Aristote, the texts are so very difficult – one never know very well on what level (plan) they are. Are they on the first level, that of substance, or are they on the second level, that of the attribute, of the essential attribute, the level of essence according to Aristotle or the level of the essential attribute according to Descartes? All this is going to get very complicated.
Henceforth, perhaps I can already simplify a bit by saying, what is Leibniz’s enterprise? This will be to save the two characteristics at any cost, that is, there’s going to be a great polemic against both Aristotelian and Cartesian essence, given that both of them, Aristotle and Descartes, each created a very different conception of essence. And so I’d like this whole polemic to be placed – I say immediately that this is why all this appears so important concerning the problem of Baroque thought – that what Leibniz is going to oppose to the essentialism common to Aristotle and Descartes, whatever their differences, is really what we must call a Mannerism about which we’ll see what it consists of.
There you have my first introductory comment. I am making a second comment, and for anyone who can’t take any more, eh?… So, this is because it’s a comment that you must have well in mind to understand. I’ve discussed this a bit. It seems to me that all of ancient thought, Aristotle included, but especially Aristotle, Aristotle – there’s a mania for the final word, I believe – passes through a theory and through conceptions of opposition. They have the idea that things are opposed, whether it’s a struggle between hate and love, a struggle among elements, of the dry and the wet, of whatever you like, of water and fire, everywhere a struggle. It’s therefore significant the way that Aristotle nearly ends Greek philosophy through one of the greatest theories of opposition, this theory of opposition that I’ll tell you about briefly, but not too much because this would be an entirely separate subject which isn’t necessary to understand.
But, but, but, [Pause] I am saying, what, on the other hand, in seventeenth-century thought is the great innovation? And here, I believe that it’s an innovation to which we have to be attentive if we want to understand them. There’s no longer opposition, you understand, because we are doing things wrong, because we present things poorly when we don’t see the benefit that this presented. We only see the disadvantage. We are generally told, yes, the seventeenth-century understood nothing about the problem of opposition, and that falls back into an easy schema – I am not saying that mine is easier – that falls back into an easy schema, specifically that it was necessary to wait for young Kant, and it’s at the beginning of Kant, to introduce real opposition, the reality of opposition, into the world and in philosophy with the concept. And that occurs in a small, admirable work by Kant, called “An Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Quantities into Philosophy.” This little work of about fifty pages, “An Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Quantities into Philosophy”, had a fundamental importance because it broke with the philosophy known as classical. So-called classical philosophy misunderstood, it seems, the oppositions and reduces all opposition, as it’s said, to a simple limitation. There wasn’t any real opposition; there were only logical limitations.
So that tells us a lot, but we forget the opposite side, I mean, the fantastic progress that this seventeenth-century thought represented. For, if the seventeenth century ignores this opposition when thinking of Kant who rediscovered it, on the other hand, Greek thought was perfectly familiar with it, not in the same way as Kant, but it knew about opposition perfectly, quite perfectly. [Pause] As a result, the Classics, especially starting from Descartes, knew perfectly well what they are doing when they break with the great Aristotelian theory of opposites. What did they want to substitute for it? For the logic of opposition, they wanted to substitute a logic of pure distinction. [Pause] And here, we must reflect at length on this phrase to understand truly the importance it has from the perspective of a logic of thought. Starting from Descartes or for the Cartesians, things are no longer opposed to one another, but are distinguished one from another. This is it, in my view, to the point that I consider it as one of the misfortunes of classical thought, the rejection of opposition in favor of distinction. Things are distinguished and are no longer opposed. A little Cartesian, I’d say – a minor Cartesian, a philosopher of little importance; he created manuals, he created a Cartesian manual – had an expression that he himself found – it’s odd, he’s not great, just something from one of the small ones. [Laughter] – His expression is – I’m giving it to you in Latin because it’s more respectable; so you will understand it on your own – Non opposita sed diversa, not opposed, but diverse. If you prefer, it’s not opposed, but distinct.
What does he mean? He says it about substances, and about the two Cartesian substances, extended substance and thinking substance (substance étendue, substance pensante). Why is this essentially very, very important? They are not opposed, but distinct, but diverse. This is essential because, consider, it’s easy to oppose extension and thought. For example, I’d say one is mortal and the other is immortal; the body is mortal, the mind, euh, the soul is immortal. Or else I’d say extension is divisible, and thought is indivisible. I am proceeding through opposita. I can even say one wins out over the other, that one is – as was said at the time in their language – that one is eminent in relation to the other. Indivisible is more perfect than divisible; immortal is more perfect that mortal. So… And Descartes often recalls all that, all these simple oppositions, and what’s important is that this is not how Descartes proceeds. What interests Descartes is not oppositions. And Descartes says it a thousand times: what matters for him is defining each substance through an attribute belonging to it properly and positively. One must define extension positively, not through an opposed characteristic. The attribute should be a position of substance, and not an opposition of another substance. One must define extension positively, and one must define thought positively in order to grasp them as attributes of corresponding substances that, henceforth, are diverse, distinct substances, and not opposed substances.
And I believe that the substitution of a logic of distinction for an Aristotelian logic of opposition is fundamental. And on this point, it only makes sense if there is indeed a logic of distinction. Well, yes, and I am telling you about it very quickly, and then you will reflect on all this. In general, Descartes tells us – this is the whole thesis of, all Cartesian logic – there are three types of distinction: [Pause] you have the distinction of reason, or abstraction; the modal distinction; and the real distinction. [Pause] A general comment concerning distinctions and an essential comment: distinctions only concern concepts and representations, not things; therefore, above all, do not believe that when Descartes says that two things are really distinct, that means that they are so insofar as [being] really distinguished things. As you will see, he means something entirely different. Distinctions are criteria concerning ideas, ideas, and only ideas as a function of which, we can provide the following three definitions:
There is distinction of reason when I conceive of two things [Pause] in such a way that I cannot conceive one without thinking, even in a confused way, about the other. [Pause] Example: body-extension, I cannot think about the body without thinking about extension; I cannot think about extensions without thinking, even in a confused way, about some body. [Pause] Other example: mind-thinking, [Pause] I cannot conceive of a mind that doesn’t think; I cannot conceive of a thought that’s not from a mind. You see it’s a matter of ideas. I conceive. It’s ideas that I have about things. There are sanctions of reason when I have an idea of a thing that I cannot have without having, at least in a confused way, the idea of another thing. At that moment, there is distinction of reason between two things.
Modal distinction: there is modal distinction when I have an idea of one thing [Pause] by necessarily having the idea of another thing. I have idea a by necessarily having the idea of b – it’s still a question of ideas – but I can have the idea of b without having the idea of a. [Pause] I’d say that this is a modal distinction. [Pause] Example: extension-movement, I cannot conceive, I cannot have the idea of a movement without getting the idea of an extension, but I can very well have the idea of an extension without the idea of movement, an immobile extension. I’d say at that point that between extension and movement, there is a modal distinction, and not one of reason. [Pause]
There is real distinction; you define it, henceforth, it’s always – this is especially the misunderstanding that happens to us all the time and, in itself, it’s a catastrophe – there is always real distinction when you think of things, and nothing else, but when you think of a thing while denying (niant) [Pause] all that belongs to the other thing, to an other thing, [Pause] and yet thinking of the first thing as distinct from any other. [Pause] You think of a thing, you think of a while denying all that belongs to b, and through this, you think of a as distinct from anything else, any other thing. [Pause] Example: [Pause] I deny in the idea of thinking all that belongs to extension. [Pause] But, by thinking in this way of the idea of thinking, or the idea of mind, by thinking in this way of the idea of mind, I am distinguishing it from any other substance. [Pause] You see that this is not explaining to yourself an expression that, otherwise, would be very ambiguous. Philosophers like Descartes or Malebranche, for them, to say that two things are really distinct does not mean that they are really distinguished. To say that two things are really distinct means that they are conceived – they are conceived – in such a way that one implies nothing about what belongs to the other. [Pause] Henceforth, these things, they’re separable. Now, whether they are really separable or not, that’s something else. I can say that they are separable. That’s all I can say. Real distinction exerts itself over ideas no less than the two other distinctions.
So then, this is where we are: I’d like to show how Descartes uses his theory of distinction in order to determine the criteria of substance according to him, and how the polemic with Leibniz against Descartes will burst forth at that point on this level. There you have it!
 
Lecture 16, 5 May 1987: The Theory of Substance in Aristotle, Descartes and Leibniz 
… and that, with great agility, he [Leibniz] constantly jumps from one criterion to the other. It goes without saying that these criteria are entirely coherent. I would, in my view, distinguish a logical criterion, [Pause] an epistemological criterion, a physical criterion or – to speak in a scholarly way – a technical or physicalist criterion, and a psychological criterion.[2]
So, what complicates the situation? It’s that both – for this, it’s very, very subtle, all this; you’ll have to be especially perceptive – [Leibniz] both wants – and toward what? – on one hand, he both wants there to be two problems that are constantly, that lead things towards conveying some new criteria of substance generally, and at the same time, towards creating a way in which, in the name of these new criteria, it would evidently seem that extension cannot be a substance. [Pause] And the two problems are very interlinked, you understand? But on the other hand, — [Pause; the shrill squeaking of a door is heard and bothers Deleuze] What is that? [A student near Deleuze: It’s the door in the next classroom] Ah… I was thinking that there was a door in this very wall, and that… — On the other hand, you understand, he wants to reactivate Aristotle – I was going to say, this might only be, literally, to provoke the Cartesians – he wants to reactivate Aristotle in his own theory of substance, but at the same time, maintain in contrast to Aristotle some of the knowledge gained from Cartesianism. [The door squeak is again heard, with a groan and reaction from Deleuze: This is just not possible.]
So, we are going to try to untangle all that, and I was telling you, well fine, we must start off from the Cartesian knowledge that was acquired. If you wish to understand a bit of what and how Descartes could appear to be the founder of a new kind of logic, I believe one has to consider less Descartes’s explicit texts and more the consequences of what the (we might say) “little Cartesians” drew from them. The task of working through the logic of a philosophy is perhaps the work of philosophers who are more like commentators, and I was telling you [that] they were quite precise. What Descartes brings is a logic of distinction. What is there that’s new in a logic of distinction? It’s that it breaks with the Aristotelian logic of opposition, such that – once again, I insist on this point, if only to avoid undertaking bad history of philosophy – there’s a notion (schema) in the history of philosophy stating that the seventeenth century knew nothing of opposition, of real opposition, and that it was Kant who discovered it in his famous text, in the small text that, in fact, is a wonder, “An Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Quantities into Philosophy”, where he discovers and opposes real oppositions that then will bring about all of post-Kantism, including Hegel, that’s clear.
And I am simply saying, no, that’s not how it is, that’s not how it is. It’s not like the seventeenth century knew nothing about opposition. It didn’t just ignore opposition. Rather, quite deliberately, consciously, it breaks with a logic of opposition in order to substitute for it a logic of distinction. And when the Kantians rediscover opposition, this will also quite obviously not be a complete return to Aristotle. It will be in a new form, specifically infinite opposition, which did not exist in Aristotle for whom opposition is always finite. No, one must be very careful in these evaluations of an historical evolution in philosophy.
And well, Descartes’s logic of distinction is what I had done the last time. We ended on this point, and I only want to take it up again because you must understand it absolutely, and first of all, the following principle: distinction, the operation of the mind consisting of distinguishing, does not bear on things, but on representations. All logical distinctions are distinctions concerning representation or the idea. It does not concern things themselves. Of course, there will be consequences for things, but no distinction bears on things. It bears on the ideas that we have of things as a function of what Descartes told us, [that] there are three little distinctions: the distinction of reason, the modal distinction, and the real distinction. And understand – and here again, this would be a catastrophic misunderstanding – that even real distinction bears on ideas, and bears only on ideas.
In what sense? You recall the order of the three distinctions; once more, it’s on this point that ended the last time. There is real distinction between two things – I seem to be contradicting myself, and you will see that I’m not – there is real distinction between two things when I can develop an idea of one – when I develop an idea of one – [Pause] while denying (nier) what belongs to the other. [Pause] In other words, two things are really distinct (réellement distinctes) when I conceive of one not only independently of the other because — independently of the other, I can, for example, conceive of a triangle without conceiving that its two, that its three angles are equal to two right angles. But what I cannot do is conceive of a triangle while denying that its three angles are equal to two right angles. Thus, there is no real distinction. But, according to Descartes, I can conceive of thought while denying all that belongs [to it], denying all that belongs to the extension (étendue) of the thought. I would say that thought and extension are really distinct, that is, are conceived as really distinct. This is strictly synonymous. To go more quickly, we say that two things are really distinct, but that you must understand that it’s their ideas that are really distinct, that is, both things are conceived as really distinct at the point where the Cartesian reasoning is usually this – and it mattered greatly for Leibniz; yes, today, we must grasp this as a rather painful lesson, since it’s again a terminology lesson. Descartes tells us exactly: two things that are really distinct are separable, that is, two things conceived as really distinct can be separated. Now, are they separated? For the moment, we have no idea. Are they effectively separated? I’d say, are they truly distinguished insofar as they are things? We just don’t know.
Take the development of Descartes’s Meditations. From the start of the Meditations, or rather quickly, he is going to show that thought is conceived as really distinct from extension, that is, I can conceive the thought while denying anything belonging to extension. Thus, thought and extension are conceived as really distinct, but as he himself says, he cannot yet draw from this the conclusion that thought and extension are separate. And as he says, perhaps it’s the body that thinks; that’s not his concern on this level. His concern on this level is showing that thought can be conceived while denying anything belonging to extension, nothing more. So they are separable, but not necessarily separate. In order to conclude that these are two substances separate in things – up to here, he has just concluded that these were attributes, that these were distinct attributes – in order to conclude that these are two substances separate in things, he will have to make another step, specifically that God necessarily conforms to the distinct ideas he gives us. Notice that the Cartesian argument is quite simple: it’s that if God gave us distinct ideas and yet didn’t conform to them, that is, if he made non-separate something that he makes us think of as separate, this would be a lying God, who’d be trying to deceive us. And it is well known that God cannot deceive us, so fine.
But the end of this argument matters little. What interests me is that real distinction is defined at the level of representation. Once again, two things are really distinct when you can think of one while denying all that belongs to the other, period, that’s it, when you can think, that is, when you create for yourself the idea of one that denies everything belonging to the other. [Pause] There you have it. [Pause] I would say [that] there is real distinction when you think a without b, and b without a. Henceforth, there is real distinction between a and b. [Pause]
There’s modal distinction when you can think a without b, but you cannot think b without a. Notice that modal distinction is a unilateral distinction. [Pause] Example: extension and movement. According to Descartes, I cannot think of movement without an extension. On the other hand, I can very well think of immobile extension without movement. [Pause]
Finally, the distinction of reason that equally concerns or, what we call differently abstraction; distinction of reason is abstraction. And abstraction is an operation that concerns representation, that concerns ideas, that does not concern things. It’s when you cannot think a without confusedly thinking b, without thinking at least confusedly b, and you cannot think b without thinking at least confusedly a. I would say that between the body and thought, between the body and the mind, there is real distinction; between the body and movement, there is modal distinction; between the body and extension, there is distinction of reason. Why? Because I cannot think of a body, that is, I cannot form the idea of a body, without thinking at least confusedly of some extension, and I cannot think of extension without thinking at least confusedly of some body whatever. You will tell me, yes I can, I can perhaps think of an extension without the body. Descartes says no. However confusedly it might be, you have the image of a body when you are thinking, but it’s the limits of this body, it’s very vague, etc. But all that, let’s just assume it; it’s not a matter for arguing. Fine.
So, everything depends on all that, is this understood? No… questions? [Pause] If you happen one day to read Descartes, and for those who have read him, obviously, it’s a catastrophic misunderstanding to think that when he is speaking of two really distinct things, he means to be talking of two truly distinguished things. So, good, fine. From this point, let’s move onward.
I am scrutinizing the criterion that we could call “logic of substance.” And well, in Descartes there is indeed a logic of substance criterion, [Pause] and Descartes offers it, he offers it in some reflective texts. I already told you that the Meditations include objections made to Descartes, that a certain number of thinkers of the period made to Descartes, and Descartes’s answers to these objections. It’s much more in the objections and the answers that we find discussion about the logic assumed by Descartes’s Meditations. And it seems to me at least, it seems to me that all of Descartes’s texts are convergent. The criterion of substance is simplicity. In other words, [for] a substance, the logical criterion means that it’s a criterion of thought. [Pause] Substance is something simple, that’s thought as simple. What does it mean to be thought in this way? In fact, he will quite willingly identity…
— [The noise from the door in the next room continues] Why didn’t it make that noise the other times? [Several students offer answers] It was doing that? [A student: Yes] Then why wasn’t I noticing it? [The student: It’s gotten worse] Ah, ah… [Laughter] So this is going to be good for us with Leibniz. Oh, hold on to this example! Hold on to this example! We’re going to be able to use it. It will make everything clear for you. But, alas, for Descartes, that is of no use at all because for Descartes, very few things are useful. [Laughter] —
So, this is simplicity, and you are already equipped to understand. That doesn’t mean without elements; that means something is simple when its eventual elements [Pause] are not distinguished except by a distinction of reason, that is, are distinguished neither by a modal distinction, nor by a distinction, euh… [A student: Real] A real distinction, but by a distinction of reason, that is, by abstraction. Something is simple when its elements are distinguished by abstraction. Example: the body and extension. [Pause] Example: the mind and thought. [Pause] You immediately see the consequences. Here I am jumping forward because the consequences immediately explode. I am solely seeking to draw forth a kind of logic of the theory of substance in Descartes, and a very simple logic.
I would say that, in Descartes, henceforth, substance is necessarily determined by an attribute that will be named the essential attribute. Why is substance determined by the essential attribute? Precisely because it only has a distinction of reason with this attribute. [Pause] The essential attribute is the determination of the substance as simple substance, as simple notion. [Pause] There you are. Why is extension a substance? Because extension is, in fact, the essential attribute of the body. Why is it the essential attribute of the body? It’s the essential attribute of the body because it only has a distinction of reason with the body. Thus, it forms with the body a simple notion. Henceforth, it’s a substance, the extended substance.
That seems simple, [but] it doesn’t go without saying. It’s necessary to have already constituted a logic of distinctions, and a logic of distinctions doesn’t go without saying. Once again, this is properly Cartesian, the logic of distinctions, and not before [Descartes]. The whole Middle Ages used notions of distinction, but this was not in the name of a logic of distinctions. And in fact, in Descartes, this is all united, the constitution of a logic of distinctions and the refinement of distinctions as reduced to three. [Pause] Fine.
On this point, therefore, this isn’t Descartes. We only retain from Descartes what we find necessary for Leibniz. If we read Leibniz, we notice something funny, even with a cursory reading. [Deleuze casually flips pages of a text] If we turn the pages, as we say, this is strange. For a long while, there was never the word “simple” in his writing regarding substance. You never found “simple substance” or “substance is simple.” You are going to tell me that I shouldn’t exaggerate. But it suffices, as you have all done because this is part of our pact, it suffices to open the Monodaology, and we read in paragraph 1, not to go any farther, “The monad, of which we are speaking here, is nothing other than a simple substance.” Yes, [but] this isn’t bothersome because the Monadology is a text that came rather late. Starting from a particular moment, it’s true that Leibniz deigns to speak of a simple substance. I ask, when? And I ask, why didn’t he talk about it before? We’ll see, henceforth, that this has a certain interest for us. He begins speaking of the monad as simple substance when he moves farther and farther into a problem that we are not yet ready to understand and that concerns substances that he calls composite substances. Thus, there are composite substances. He insists on distinguishing between simple substances and composite substances. Henceforth, this means that any substance is not simple, that henceforth simplicity continues not being a criterion of substance. [Pause]
Next, [Pause] when he wasn’t yet speaking of simple substance, how did he then define that it’s substance? How did he characterize it from a logical viewpoint? By unity. He said, substance is one. He wasn’t saying that it’s simple. [Pause] In the Letters to Arnauld, in the Discourse on Metaphysics, you will not find a single use of “simple substance.” You will find “the one substance” (substance une). You’ll tell me, fine, fine, you are interested in words, but one or simple. We’ll have to see. André Robinet, who has worked extensively in the seventeenth century, you know, he uses computers on the occurrence of texts as applied to lexicons. This has considerable interest for philosophy, and so he can note very well the moment that the nominal group “simple substance” appears, for which he can provide a date, and, in fact, it’s quite late. Before, there’s no question of this. I am saying, I am adding, when Leibniz speaks of simple substances, it’s in order to distinguish one kind of substance from another kind of substance that are composite substances, but what do the two kinds of substances have in common? Not simplicity. They have unity in common. These are unities. [Pause] 
Let’s then try to move forward. There are two solutions: telling oneself, oh, perhaps there isn’t such a great difference between unity and simplicity, and then, telling oneself, by all accounts, the difference is huge. Why would the difference be huge before even knowing what these differences are? Well, the difference is huge because there’s already a move occurring here, Leibniz is in the process of making a move. What is Leibniz’s move? As I was telling you, it’s that he is fully reactivating Aristotle. Who is it that was defining substance with unity? It was Aristotle. When Descartes defines substance with simplicity, we can consider that he’s evening up the score with Aristotle, that Descartes’s true thesis is: you will not define substance with unity. You must define it with simplicity, and this isn’t the same thing. And when Leibniz defines substance with unity, we must understand, it’s vitally necessary to return to Aristotle and to restore a definition of substance with unity in order to escape from the radically inadequate criterion that Descartes was able to invent, to wit, simplicity.
And a very odd passage from the correspondence with Arnauld affirms all that I am saying. He speaks a great deal there about substance in an exchange of letters in which Arnauld becomes, after having been… Arnauld was at the turning point (charnière), since he belonged to those thinkers making objections to Descartes, and in his earlier correspondence with Leibniz, he presented himself as Descartes’s defender who he had nonetheless attacked previously. He becomes Descartes’s defender, and he tells Leibniz, but in the end, you are giving a paradoxical definition to substance, implying a non-Cartesian definition. He tells him, and this is Arnauld’s exact text, against Leibniz. He tells him, “You insist on defining” – in contrast to what usually occurs – “you insist on defining substance with unity instead of opposing it to mode”. The text isn’t simple! Let’s translate: classically, one opposes substance to mode, then it’s true, substance is what is, [while] mode is a manner of being. But to say that one opposes substance to mode means what? It means that one has defined it not with mode, but with the attribute, the essential attribute. The body is defined with the extended attribute. [Pause]
So Arnauld tells Leibniz: you are defining substance with the one; henceforth, you can no longer define it with the essential attribute. We’ll see why. And then, Leibniz answers, and here, frankly, he’s having a laugh – but finally, quite frankly, that’s not entirely clear, [Laughter] especially since he is careful with Arnauld who isn’t a man one jokes with. He tells him, but what you are telling me is very odd because I myself am defining substance as everyone has done, implying here as what Aristotle did it. And the other [Arnauld] tells him, you are defining substance like no one else, implying you aren’t following our great Descartes. Leibniz answered, I am defining it as everyone else has; substance is what is one by itself (un par soi), [Pause] unam per se, that which is one by itself, there you have substance. And he says, that’s how everyone has considered this.
So they are opposed… All this is to help you feel that we’re already no longer… you see? We no longer have… At the point we’ve reached, I have spoken a lot, but what is the bit of progress that we’ve made? Earlier, we risked concluding, well fine, simple or one, it’s the same. There’s no great difference between saying something is simple and something is one. Now, we are in the process of discovering, not at all, it’s not the same. Why? Let’s hold onto to this: something simple, we can now say, is something that is determined by an attribute called essential, understanding this as that with which the thing has a distinction of reason. There you have it: something simple is something that is determined by an attribute called essential. The immediate consequence: there is not one thing that has two essential attributes. Why? Because the essential attribute has only one distinction of reason with the thing. If there are two essential attributes, there are two things. Hence, a substance will have an essential attribute, and only one. [Pause] Given this, it’s something simple; it’s something simple insofar as it’s determined by one and only one essential attribute. Fine.
Here we’re jumping ahead. Here’s Leibniz telling us: substance is something one, [Pause] it’s one by itself. They [Descartes and Leibniz] gaze at each other and understand the abyss of their differences. Why? What is oneness by oneself? Let’s look for this. [Pause] I’d say, oneness by itself is that which by itself unifies a something. The one by itself is unity in action (unité en acte). [Pause] The one cannot be thought by itself, independently of the act through which it unifies a something. [Pause] In other words, the one by itself is active unity. [Pause] What does it unify? We can give different answers that still must be connected to some things that we have previously seen, that is, — here we don’t have time for review — things we saw before Easter break. I’d say [that] it’s the internal active unity of an event, [Pause] of a movement, of a change. The unity in action necessarily hangs on an event that it unifies. [Pause] If you will, to what does a unity refer, what does it demand? [Pause] Let’s try to understand. What is the correlative of unity? Earlier, we were told [that] substance insofar as it is something simple has as correlative the essential attribute. If I define substance as unity, its correlative isn’t the essential attribute. It’s something that the one in action unifies.
So, whether this is an event, a movement or a change, what does that mean? A movement, a movement, well yes, a movement needs unity. Why does a movement need unity? [Pause] Did Descartes know that a movement needed unity? [Pause] In a very lovely text, a small treatise that is called On Nature Itself, [Pause; Deleuze looks in his book] Leibniz tells us this – the complete title is On Nature Itself or the Immanent Force and Activity of Created Things – so On Nature Itself: “The following argument that the illustrious author” – this is Descartes–[3] [Laughter] “that the illustrious author draws from the nature of movement brings no more necessity to his conclusion. He says” – Descartes – “He says that a thing’s moving is merely its successively existing in different places”. [Here Deleuze coughs violently, saying, Excuse me] “A thing’s moving is merely its successively existing in different places. However, let us grant him this” – let’s grant him that a thing’s moving is merely its successively existing in different places – “Let’s grant him this even if by this we are not entirely satisfied, and if it expresses more” – that is, if this definition expresses more – “what results from motion than its formal definition”. That’s the text, you understand? We can stop with this because we deserve it. We have spent so much, so much, so much time waiting for such a text. That it reaches us now – [The noise from the door continues, and Deleuze reacts] Oh… what shit this is!… But ok, no, this will be good for us later. [Laughter]
Understand that, to help you comprehend, I was making a connection with Bergson because I believe that, on this point, there is a rather deep Leibnizianism in Bergson.[4] [See the 24 February 1987 session on this connection] Everyone recalls here the distinction that Bergson makes between movement over and done (une fois fait) and movement in the process of occurring, and Bergson says, we cannot understand movement if we substitute for the act of movement in the process of occurring the result of the movement over and done, that is, the trace in space. I am rereading in order to try to persuade you that this connection wasn’t exaggerated. I am rereading the text: “Descartes” – while correcting it slightly, while summing it up – “Descartes defining movement with a thing’s moving is merely its successively existing in different places. We are not entirely satisfied with this definition because it expresses more what results from motion than the formal definition of motion”.[5] It [the definition] expresses what results from motion (or movement); grant me that I am not translating, that I haven’t deformed anything, if I say [that] it expresses movement over and done. It’s once that movement is done that I can say that the moving thing has changed its site. In other words, if I consider movement in the process of occurring, it needs a unity that it absolutely does not receive in this definition, the change of place. There is necessity: this is the principle of sufficient reason. If you recall that we saw the principle of sufficient reason, there is necessity that movement in the process of occurring refers to unity. [If] you don’t insist on unity, you can never grasp anything except movement over and done. In other words, Descartes didn’t grasp movement in the process of occurring, and this is why his entire physics failed with movement. [Pause] For a dynamics of movement, he substituted a static conception (une statique) of movement already done.
And so, what is unity of movement in the process of occurring? [Pause] A bit farther on in the text On Nature Itself, Leibniz continues. Recall the definition; he’s taking Descartes’s definition to task, a thing’s moving is merely its successively existing in different places. He says, “For the body… For the body at any moment in its motion” – You see? When movement is in the process of occurring – “For the body at any moment in its motion is not merely in the present moment of its motion that which exactly fits it” – that is, that which exactly fits its mass, small m — “For the body at any moment in its motion is not merely in the present moment of its motion that which exactly fits it in order to change its place, but it also encompasses an urge or tendency” – it also encompasses an urge or a tendency – “to change its place” – but it also encompasses, there you have movement in the process of occurring. At each moment, you will have determined, at each abstract moment in the end, well then, we have to take into account the urge or tendency to change its place, “so that its next state follows by itself from the present one” – hold onto “by itself” which we will greatly need — “follows by itself from the present one through the force of its nature.” In other words, if I want to speak in more scholarly terms, mathematical or physical terms borrowed from Leibniz’s terminology, movement in the process of occurring implies a differential, a differential of movement. The unity of movement in the process of occurring is, in the first place, the differential of movement, that is, the difference between the movement that has just occurred and the one that’s occurring, or between the one that is occurring and the one that is going to occur. We can call this differential effort (or urge); in Latin, we will call it conatus, that is, effort, or urge, or admit that Bergson is not far off when he calls it tendency. [Pause]
So, at each assumed instant of movement, movement can be conceived as a succession of places at different instants since movement in the process of occurring implies at each instant a unity that is the differential of the movement or the conatus, that is the effort to pass from one site to another so that the following state emerges from the preceding state. There is not a succession of the following state and of the preceding state. There is an urge through which the following state emerges from the preceding state. Grant me, here as well, that what Bergson calls a duration is nothing other than this urge itself. But that’s not all. Or else, in other texts, he will say [that] there isn’t any movement if you don’t conceive of an interior spring (ressort) in the body, in the body being created. And you recall, this was where, entirely where we began. Back when we started [the seminar], we saw that Leibniz’s physics is presented as a physics of elasticity, and the physics of elasticity as a physics of the spring.[6] And in fact, I am quoting yet another text from the same period, a very beautiful text, this time taken from New System of the Nature, paragraph 18: “We can say that when bodies collide” – that is, the movement in which two bodies collide — “We can say that when bodies collide, each one suffers” – this is beautiful, this expression – “each one suffers only from its own elasticity (ressort)”. This is why he criticizes Descartes for having conceived that bodies last and for having understood nothing about the communication of movement since he didn’t grasp that movement referred to elastic force or to the interior spring of the body. “We can say that when bodies collide, each one suffers only from its own elasticity,” comma, “caused … by the motion already in it.” And fine.
So there we have the first fact we’ve gained (acquis). Movement in each instant that you will be able to determine, whatever the instant might be, however close it might be to the given instant, demands a unity, demands an internal unity without which there would never be a movement in the process of occurring, without which there would be no movements over and done. In other words, there would be no movement at all, and this is what [Leibniz] explains at length in On Nature Itself. He explains something interesting: “The mechanism seeks to explain everything through movement” – this is going to be his great critique of mechanicism – “the mechanism seeks to explain everything through movement”. Only, it’s strange, [as] he himself [presumably Descartes, not Leibniz] absolutely does not manage to explain movement. He can only reach movements over and done. He is forced to assume movement. And moreover, if you again look at the definition, change of site, if you refer to the definition we just saw, euh, in On Nature Itself, “a thing’s moving is merely its successively existing in different places,” but we would have no means to distinguish a body in movement and a body at rest. There’s no way to distinguish the two since, [if] you take the moving thing’s existence in a place at a given time, no difference can be assigned between the distances of one moving thing in a site and the existence of a nonmoving thing in a site. In other words, you will not even be able to distinguish two places if there is not movement in the process of occurring; you will not be able to distinguish two bodies. The mechanism seeks to distinguish everything through movement, there you are, but it’s unable to distinguish the slightest movement in the process of occurring. [Pause] And yet, this is valid only for any instant whatever of movement. A movement in the process of occurring at any instant whatever demands unity. This unity will be what Descartes ignored, the conatus, that is, the differential of movement. But with all the more reason – [A student indicates that he has a question] Yes, right away, I’m completing this point and, euh, then it’s your turn – but with all the more reason, as instants deducted from movement are abstract, the aggregate of a movement obviously demands an internal unity, an act. [Pause]
What is this internal unity? What is this act? Leibniz will determine it in several ways; here, we are anticipating on future discussions. I am saying that he can give it a physical determination, and this will be motor action (action motrice). [Pause] He will be able to give it a metaphysical determination, and this will be substance, the monad, the monad itself. Why can he not give it directly, there, a metaphysical determination? We’ll see, we’ll see. We’ll see because here, we are only taking up this: if you consider and if you distinguish movement in the process of occurring and movement already done and movement completely done, you see that movement in the process of occurring refers to and requires an interior unity, either first an instantaneous unity, or more deeply, a unity for the whole of its duration. [Pause] As a result, movement is the predicate of a substance defined through active unity, or if you prefer, there is a spontaneity of movement, calling spontaneity the rapport of movement to the active unity which produces it, the interior unity which produces it. And it is there that spontaneity appears, always in two steps, active unity spontaneity that spontaneously produces movement or that produces a spontaneous movement, no matter, always in two steps, as unity in the instant and as unity for the whole of the movement’s duration.
Unity in the instant, I take up my text again, as I have time here, On Nature Itself, such a beautiful text this is. [Pause; Deleuze searches in his text] “For the body at any moment in its motion is not merely in the present moment of its motion that which exactly fits it, but it also encompasses an urge or tendency to change its place so that its next state follows by itself from the present one through the force of its nature,” — through the force of its nature — “so that its next state follows by itself from the present one through the force of its nature.” How to say this in Latin, how to translate it into Latin, for those who have studied a bit of Latin? We would translate exactly “by a force” by sua sponte, by its own spontaneity. [Pause] We should not be surprised that we perpetually find the term “spontaneous” in Leibniz, an active unity of movement at the level, once again, of the instant as well as of the aggregate of time taken by a determined movement.
There we have a first point. You sense that I no longer find myself faced with “substance-essential attribute equals Simple”. I find myself facing “substance-movement equal interior unity” that spontaneously produces movement. [Pause] We are in the process of confirming that the Simple has strictly nothing to do with the one by itself. [Pause] For the simplicity relation – substance, constant essential attribute – is substituted the relation of unity – substance, changing movement, the unity of which gives us active or spontaneous reason. [Pause] You sense immediately the conclusion. How do you expect extension to be substance? Extension is incapable of producing the slightest movement. It’s incapable of saying, even between two bodies – and Leibniz will look into this a thousand times – extension is incapable of saying between two bodies which one is moving. Is it my train or the train beside mine that’s moving? If I lack any reference points of extension, I cannot assign movement to one body rather than to the other for a simple reason: extension gives me no sufficient reason to distinguish rest and movement. And you see why since extension only recognizes movement as movement over and done. [Pause] There you are. Our first conclusion is that. regarding movement in the process of occurring, it is movement in the process of occurring that demands a unity for itself as much in the instant as in the whole of its duration. There you are, that’s it. [Pause] Yes, your turn, [Deleuze indicates the student who had spoken earlier] you who had something to say!
Questionn: [Inaudible; it concerns a comparison of Descartes and Leibniz] Is this clear?
Deleuze : It’s quite clear, but it has multiple aspects. I’d say that, on some points, it seems false to me, but it’s because I haven’t had the time, and I don’t know if you, if your knowledge of Descartes… It’s not correct to say that Descartes doesn’t have the means to define speed. He defines speed perfectly, euh, but this, it would take too long. I’d have to try to lay out some of Descartes’s physics, but he has no problem with defining speed. That presents him with no problem, even as a function of this definition of movement.
What there is, where you are more correct, is if this is the same conception of causality in Descartes and in Leibniz. I’d say, given the evidence, clearly not, it’s not the same distinction of causality. So, furthermore, once we’ve said that, in movement, something is conserved, is it the same conception, I am saying, not only of what is conserved, but the same conception of conservation itself through a movement? In this, it’s not the same thing that’s conserved, it’s well known for Descartes, and for Leibniz, but why there is it said… — if we have time, we will try to see about this point – but your question is getting out ahead of us. You pinpoint a problem correctly; in any case, what I am taking up here is that, in fact, Leibniz… I wouldn’t say that Descartes ignored speed; I’d say that Leibniz is already committed to proposing to us a new conception of speed and of presenting to us a conception of the unity of movement that calls on notions that are entirely new in relation to Descartes, and in relation to Cartesianism since I just want, I just want to indicate some things by saying, you understand, such a conception of movement… We mustn’t wonder too much why Descartes isn’t aware of this. [A coughing noise partially covers Deleuze’s voice here]
The little that I’ve said ought to make you tell yourself… [Deleuze does not finish] You know, once again, we always get the solutions that we deserve as a function of the means at hand. It seems to me that the little I’ve said on this conception of movement in Leibniz should suffice to persuade you that it wasn’t a question of being able to conceive of it without, let’s say, an infinitesimal calculus. Must we say that Descartes was unfamiliar with this calculus? Yes and no, because some equivalents or forerunners of infinitesimal calculus allowing one to conclude from one instant to another, however close they might be, you will find it already in the Middle Ages. But precisely Descartes didn’t want any of that, and besides, he didn’t want it for mathematical reasons. And if Leibniz is able to bring it back, this is because he forged a new weapon that was infinitesimal calculus, the mathematical power of which couldn’t be denied and which would allow him to speak of the conatus as a differential of movement. [Pause] But it’s not a question, no question of being able even to conceive of something like this if one doesn’t have the means, and the means symbolize… [End of cassette; interruption of the BNF recording]
… of movement in extension that demands an active unity, so we indeed see that it’s an active unity. In the final instance, it’s substance, the monad. Fine. But we don’t have movement. We don’t know where it comes from. Here we’ve just made a bet on the future. We haven’t spoken of this until now. We have only spoken about the whole series, world, monad, but not about movement as physical reality. We haven’t spoken about physics. So, let’s say that movement even in extension that demands a unity of another nature than extension, we have just seen [that] it refers in the end to changes that are not simple movements.
Movement is what we call local change, the change of place; we have just seen this. But there are other kinds of change, and not for Descartes perhaps. But classically, that is, coming from Aristotle, there are other kinds of change. Movement is a change, that is, it’s only a case of change. It’s also what [Pause] Leibniz says quite well, still in On Nature Itself. “Aristotle, who in my view is deeper that many think” – you see, this comes up again – “judged that there must be (qualitative) alteration in addition to change of place” [Pause] “and that matter is not everywhere the same in itself in a way that it doesn’t remain invariable. So, this qualitative diversity and, consequently, alteration is not adequately explained by Descartes,” pardon, “by Aristotle.” What he takes from Aristotle is that local change itself refers to a change of another nature which is a qualitative change. When you say, for example, a thing that was black becomes white, it’s an alteration; it doesn’t change place, it changes quality.
Here you have another change, and what is Leibniz’s idea? You anticipate it. You see, we’ve begun and it’s quite complex, and at the same time, very simple to understand: movement as local change, we rise to necessary unity of movement in the process of occurring in the instant. One more step: unity of movement in the process of occurring in the whole of its duration. One more step: no longer local movement, no longer local change, but qualitative change. Why does this change us to qualitative change? Because qualitative change is interior to substance, interior to the monad. [Pause] And we start the same reasoning, but more and more deeply: it is qualitative change that requires an active unity that is going to produce it spontaneously, substance then defined as the active unity of qualitative change. [Pause]
Substance has two definitions that are linked to one another: interior unity of movement in the process of occurring in the instant or on the whole of its duration, [Pause] active unity of interior change; interior unity of movement in the process of occurring, active unity of change itself interior. In fact, you recall, the monad, the individual substance never stops changing state, qualitative state. And in a certain way, the states through which the monad passes have to refer to a spontaneity of production, exactly as movement in the process of occurring implies a spontaneity of production. [Pause] The monad has to contain the active principle of its own changes. Fine.
What happens to us as change? Let’s look for an example. And here we have Leibniz confronting an example that is brought to him by someone for whom he has a great, great esteem, one of his contemporaries, with whom he will have a long correspondence, long conversations, and with whom, I believe, he will not speak in the same tone as with others. And this contemporary is called [Pierre] Bayle.[7] And Bayle is a very strange character in the seventeenth, eighteenth century. He creates the strangest dictionary in the world. He creates articles on one theme and another, and then, in the margins of these articles, he creates other articles. This is a method that, some notes that finally get lengthy. In the notes, there are notes. It’s a very strange, very beautiful, very interesting book, and where Bayle, in his dictionary, in the article Rorarius, studies… no matter, at the article R, in the notes that finally take on more importance than the texts themselves, he criticizes Leibniz and creates an exposé of the strange philosophy of Monsieur Leibniz. And Leibniz is very interested by the way in which Bayle presents him, and he speaks of this, or at least he includes this: “Monsieur de Leibniz pretends that a monad changes its state following a kind of spontaneity.” See, it’s enough to trace this. I am simply taking up Leibniz’s expression because, for movement, “so that its next state follows by itself from the present one through the force of its nature.” I’d say that unity of movement, you see, there’s a double spontaneity, in fact: unity of movement produces movement spontaneously; this is the unity of movement in the process of occurring; and the following state of movement results from the preceding state spontaneously, sua sponte. It’s the first spontaneity that guarantees the second. [Pause]
If you now place yourself in the individual substance of the monad – I am changing states – it’s the same thing. I have to prove, to show two things if I am Leibnizian. I have to show that substance is spontaneous reason of the production of change, and that the resultant state emerges from the preceding state spontaneously. The two implicate each other absolutely. [Pause] Eh? Are you following me? This is a final effort before we rest; this effort is going to be quite difficult.
And Bayle tells him, so there, explain to me anyway what’s going on. There’s a dog eating its soup – we can’t say that philosophers don’t speak with concrete examples [Laughter] – there’s a dog eating its soup. It’s enjoying pleasure, [a] state of the dog’s monad, for the dog is a monad just like you and me, a monad that expresses the universe, simply it doesn’t express it in the same way as we do. It’s a dog point of view. We will see what this is. And besides, this will be a problem for us, what a dog point of view is, and what a horse point of view is, since all monads express the world, including the horse monad and dog monad. Good, but before reaching such chasms, let’s assume, eh, you’re a dog, fine, and you get struck by a stick when you are in the act of eating your soup. You are changing states; this is a qualitative change. You pass from the state of pleasure to pain, a qualitative change.
Bayle say, so now, where’s the spontaneity? I get struck on the head with a stick, suddenly, and so then is there, in the monad, in my monad, is there something that produces the blow from the stick? But, no, no, stop exaggerating! In what way is this spontaneous? In what way is the passage… Bayle picks the best example. He says, strictly speaking we can say, you pass from pain to pleasure, there’s a tendency towards pleasure; there is an urge toward pleasure that explains that you pass there spontaneously. But when you get struck with a stick, when you pass from pleasure to pain, here, no, you cannot say things like that. Stop joking around. You cannot say that you spontaneously pass from pleasure to pain. This is an important objection.
And Leibniz adds, we are going to see yet another more moving example. It’s yet again the monad Caesar, and he says, there is no doubt that the same thing, that we can conceive of the same thing about Caesar. So, he nonetheless nuances the example which yields this: an insect, a wasp wanders about, and while baby Caesar is nursing, it comes to sting the cheek of the baby emperor. You see, this is the same thing. It’s like the stick landing on the head that causes him to pass from an extreme pleasure, little Caesar, who is quite happy to be… [Laughter], he passed from an extreme pleasure. And he [Leibniz] says, it’s like this in Caesar’s entire life. There will be passages like this. So fine, let’s move on. In what way can we speak of spontaneity? Here’s how.
So, let’s say… We are no longer in the case of movement. We are in the case of the internal change of the monad. But Leibniz says, what does internal change mean exactly? I am reading the text to you because, I believe… We can explicate it after if, euh, but there’s really no need to explicate it. [Deleuze looks in his book] — Ah, my God!… Ah, no! I thought I had taken the wrong volume then, that I didn’t have my text, that’s so beautiful. — [Pause] Here we are. Leibniz’s answer gets long, so pay attention: when I am saying spontaneous, I don’t mean voluntary, deliberate. It goes without saying that one doesn’t choose suffering, that one doesn’t prefer pain, that one doesn’t want pain. When we are in the process of eating our soup, we don’t want to be struck on the head with a stick. Spontaneous never meant voluntary.
But, then, what does it mean? Here we are: “Each man is like a living being, representing the universe according to his own point of view, and especially in relation to his body.” Notice that we haven’t seen this. We haven’t yet the means to see it. There we are, the monad expresses the universe, “especially in relation to his body,” since we don’t even know what the body is. We have just started considering it with the story of movement, but we don’t know. This is not yet clear. So, we take note, we vaguely understand what it means. For example, I express the universe, but I preferably express what concerns my body; I only express the rest from farther and farther away, to the extent that it affects my body. I only express the sun to the extent that the sun affects my body. It’s quite simple what he’s saying.
This his how he connects this: “The causes that make the stick act” – eh, on the poor dog – “The causes that make the stick act” – what is this? He gives the list, and this becomes extremely moving, as the stick doesn’t arrive all by itself, that’s not how it is. What he is in the process of responding to Bayle is this: you act as if the situation was like this, the dog is eating its soup, and then there’s this stick that arrives and drops on its head. [Laughter] But Leibniz says, you are being abstract; this is pure abstraction. And then he is going to toss out a crazy idea, as you’ll see, completely crazy, in this text, but that is so concrete. He will be right, as all madmen are, he will be right through the concrete, and we’re the ones, with our poor reason, that will be abstract, deplorably abstract. We’re abstract because of Bayle, right? No, but what about the stick? [Deleuze strikes the table with something] You’ll tell me that could be a flower pot that falls on his head. But no! It can’t be a flower pot falling on his head. This is abstract as well. Why? Because there is no flower pot to fall on his head without there being, for example, people. Bayle forgets this. What does he forget? That there’s no stick that happens to strike you on the head.
Yes there is! Let’s listen to Leibniz: “Such are the causes that make the stick act, that is, the man standing behind the dog”: you see? The dog had to eat its soup, but there was a guy who, if needed, silences his footsteps to eliminate them, coming up behind the dog, a very, very auditory animal, but who so much into his soup that it’s not paying any attention. “The man standing behind the dog, getting ready to strike him while he eats” – eh? I love this text because there, that was my dream, to manage to strike a dog on the head with a stick while it’s eating its soup. [Laughter] Yes! I have never been able to manage this because… [Inaudible due to the laughter] I would have preferred a cat, but there, a cat, you know, managing to strike a cat while its eating up its ron-ron, [Laughter] that’s really difficult because they are so bad and always on the lookout.[8] — The causes that make the stick act, that is, “the man standing behind the dog getting ready to strike it while it eats, and everything there in the course of bodies that contributes to dispose this man in this way”. That is, nonetheless, we don’t strike dogs on the head with a stick while it is eating its soup if we haven’t had quite enough of this dog, [Laughter], or else if it’s in conditions where it is… The dog, for example, I’m out in the country, and it’s the neighbor’s dog that has eaten my sheep. But all this is a very concrete aggregate.
Bayle says, explain to me how the passage from pleasure to pain is spontaneous, and he tosses us into a completely abstract situation. Here’s the force of Leibniz’s answer. He eliminates all jumps; he extracts pleasure from the soup, pain from the striking stick, but says: Show me that there’s a passage, but he began by eliminating the passages. What is this passage? It’s that – I come back to the example, completing it, but grant to me Leibniz’s literality: “The dog is on my farm in the process of eating its soup. The neighbor sneaks up, someone with a heavy grievance against the dog and me. He has a stick under his arm.” Fine. The dog vaguely hears the footsteps; let’s even say that it goes, “oo, there’s a stick,” but at what level? “There’s something on my back that I don’t like,” the dog tells itself. These are tiny passages. But it is entirely absorbed by the soup. It’s not paying attention, or not enough attention.
Fine, so let’s continue: “The causes that make the stick act,” that is, “the man standing behind the dog, getting ready to strike it while it eats, and everything in the course of bodies that contributes to dispose this man to strike are also first represented in the dog’s soul.” That is, the dog’s soul has tiny perceptions of this, simply perceptions as if drowned in its great pleasure of the soup that invades it entire consciousness. But it has some tiny, indifferent perceptions, minute sounds of gravel, someone approaching behind its back. It senses from this person’s manner that there’s nothing good here. All that is also represented, first, in the dog’s soul, but weakly, by tiny, confused perceptions without apperception. What he’s calling “apperception”, is conscious perception, that is, with the dog noticing it because the dog’s body is also only affected by it imperceptibly.
“And as, the course of bodies, these dispositions,” that is, just as “in the course of bodies, these dispositions finally produce the precise blow on the dog’s body,” eh? “so too the representations of these dispositions in the dog’s soul finally produce the striking stick’s representation which, being distinguished and forceful, the dog then perceives it quite distinctly, and this is what causes its pain.” [Laughter] Ah, this is a beautiful text, and let us render praise unto Caesar because this text, yes, it’s all the more moving since it might be about a baby, understand? “We cannot understand,” he tells Bayle — we cannot stay limited to the animal – “We cannot understand that God could have placed in Jules Caesar’s soul the principle of what I am going to say about this. He happened no doubt several times to be stuck by a pin” – I said “wasp” earlier, but this is because the wasp comes on the next page; here, it occurs frequently that a baby might be stuck by a pin from the nursemaid – “He happened no doubt several times to be stuck by a pin even while he was nursing.” You see, [for] the “Caesar crosses the Rubicon” event, I can say “Caesar is stuck by a pin”, all that is the same.[9]
“Pursuing the hypothesis we examine here, it was therefore necessary that his soul be modified by itself from a feeling of pain immediately after the agreeable perceptions of sweetness from the milk. By what spring (ressort)” – he knows quite well what he is doing by using the same word; of course, this is a metaphor in the case of the soul, but it’s not by chance that he explained to us that physically, that physically the passage from one instant to another in the movement implied an interior spring within the body, just as there is a kind of spring in the soul – “By what spring was it determined to interrupt his pleasures and to be given suddenly” – suddenly – “a feeling of pain” – but it wasn’t given suddenly – “without anything to warn him to prepare for the change, nor that anything new might have occurred in the substance?”.
But he says, of course something occurred, and here, he introduces the wasp, but for the pin, it’s the same. We can suppose that hardly, hardly had the pin begun to graze him before scratching him once fully. But the wasp is like the man sneaking up behind with his stick. It [the dog] heard the movement, all that, but it simply stayed in the state of tiny perceptions. What happened? Literally, I’d say that pain, as noticed perception, [Pause] as distinguished perception, what does it do? It integrates, it results, if you prefer, through… It results from a series of tiny, unnoticed perceptions that prepare it, [Pause] and from these, it flows forth like a natural force, the pin approaching closer and closer to my body, and entering into my body, the man with his stick approaching closer and closer to me until the stick touches me violently.
In what sense is there spontaneity in the production of pain? Pain doesn’t just reach you like that. Pain appears to you, reaches you as integral, if I dare say this – but for the moment, you are taking all these words as metaphors – as integration of a whole series of tiny, unnoticed perceptions about which you can say simply, “the striking stick happened suddenly.” It’s not true. The striking stick is only a transformation of movement, specifically, the movement through which the stick approached, was raised, and is transformed into a blow that strikes me. It’s a movement in the process of occurring in its aggregate.
Let no one tell me that the striking stick comes out of nowhere. It is itself the integral element of a whole series of conatus, of all the moments through which a movement has happened. And in my soul at the level of qualitative change, of qualitative changes, it’s the same thing. My perception of the striking stick, that is, of pain, integrates the sum of tiny perceptions that I hadn’t noticed, indifferent or unconscious tiny perceptions, such that I can say [that] the striking stick results sua sponte, spontaneously, from the movement, first, of the arriving stick, then raised, then violently dropping. The striking stick flows exactly from this movement in its aggregate sua sponte, and from instants of this movement, and from differentials of this movement, exactly like, on the other hand, in my soul, that is, in my monad, pain results sua sponte from all the unnoticed preceding steps. [Pause] As a result, what I was saying earlier about movement, I must now say about internal change. Just as – yet again, if I am summing up this aggregate – just as movement refers to the interior unity of a substance alone able to account for it, so too the qualitative change refers to the active unity, the qualitative change interior to the substance this time. The qualitative change interior to the substance refers to the active unity of the substance that produces it. Produces it how? By causing the integration of tiny perceptions. And, you recall, it [the substance] represents, it expresses the universe. [Pause] Fine. What have I just shown? It’s that the theory of substance, the theory of the One, of unity by itself, implied for Leibniz a spontaneity of movement as event, a spontaneity of change as predicate. [Pause]
What can I… I would like to conclude quickly because perhaps you are already completely worn out. I get the impression that this is a great effort; trying to understand this theory, in a bizarre sense, is a great effort. But I’d immediately like to draw some conclusions from it that, for me, are essential because these are really conclusions close to our work, to the point that we have reached today.
I’d say, here… I am not concerned in this tale of the Baroque about distinctions, the complication of distinctions, for example, between the Classical, the Baroque, Mannerism, all that. We are sometimes told that Mannerism is part of the Baroque; [sometimes] that no, it’s something before the Baroque; [sometimes] it’s something else that… All this is… All this is because [Pause] people do not have the necessary concepts. I am simply saying that it’s not complicated. The Classical conception of substance is like, for me, think about it, it’s Descartes. I will call a Classical conception of substance a conception that makes of substance… that responds to the criterion of simplicity, that is, that defines substance by a constant attribute, whose attributes are distinct through a distinction of reason. You have all the elements of Classicism: the use of reason, the constancy of the attribute, the determination of substance through the attribute, all that, Classical simplicity. I would say [that] the essential point of Classical theory of substance, is what? It’s essence-form, which means what? Which means [Pause] [that] the only form of substance is its essential attribute. The essential attribute is the form of substance; extension is the form of the substance-body, of corporeal substance; the cogitatio, thought, is the form of the mens, or of the mind. That’s what Classicism is. [Pause]
So you see here, at first glance, unity, simplicity, didn’t seem to us such different notions. Now, at the point we’ve reached, we can say that an abyss truly separates them. Why? Because unity by itself is the unity that produces manners of being, manners of being either as movements like events, or as changes like predicates. [Pause] Substance is active unity of predicates, or the interior unity of events. [Pause] We discover a point that is the essential point of all our work this year. Contrary to everything that’s been done to avoid understanding Leibniz, it’s obvious that predication in Leibniz has nothing at all to do with attribution, and is even the opposite of attribution. Attribution is either a word used without any meaning or designates the determination of a something through an attribute. In Descartes… In Leibniz, something is never determined through an attribute, but something is determined as a predicate unity. What is determined of as a predicate unity? It’s something that is capable of playing the role of unity by itself in relation to predicates presenting themselves as change that only this unity can account for, active unity, unity in action. The unity in action is the criterion of substance.
Henceforth, if unity in action is the criterion of substance, I am saying that Leibniz’s conception of substance is a conception that eminently deserves the name of Mannerist. And if it’s difficult to define Mannerism in painting, it’s easy to define it in philosophy, ought to be easy to define it in… [Deleuze doesn’t finish] such that philosophy could well be used at that point to clarify this question of Mannerism in the arts. What is Mannerist is a conception of substance that tells us [that] substance is the unity by itself of manners of being and not the determination of a something through an essential attribute. What is Mannerist is a conception of substance that tells us [that] it’s the interior unity of movement in the process of occurring, event, or (which comes down to the same thing) the active unity of interior change, predicate. The predicate is not an attribute; the predicate is, your choice, a relation or an event, were it only – as we’ve just discovered – a relation to my body, but as we have seen earlier, in the form of other rapports. The predicate is never an attribute.
In other words, Mannerism in Leibniz’s theory of substance is presented in the following way: the couple spontaneity-depth, spontaneity-depth, the depth of the soul. It’s with Leibniz that this expression, the depth of the soul, appears constantly. The soul draws from its depth constantly, constantly. To convince you that this is constant, I choose an example. The Letters [from Leibniz] to Des Bosses, we sense their importance because… [Pause] “Monads draw everything from their own depth,” and here I’ve selected one example, I’m satisfied with one example, but believe me, there are thousands, there’s the word “depth”. The depth of the soul emerges with Leibniz. I would say, literally, because it’s true, the soul has a depth starting from Leibniz. “Monads draw everything from their own depth, but not like heat in the Scholastics’s work produces its effects in a hidden manner.” He does not call upon hidden forces; on the contrary, he calls upon a perfectly analyzable and visible mechanism which is that of the integration of tiny perceptions. They [monads] draw everything from their own depth. In other words, the Mannerist couple is spontaneity-depth in opposition to the Classical couple which is essence-form. [Pause]
I continue repeating myself: that which is Mannerist are movements insofar as and as grasped in the process of occurring, that is, insofar as they refer to an interior unity, at once each of their instants and the whole of their duration. What is Mannerist are changes, passages, from one position to another, from one disposition to another insofar as referring to an active unity. And they henceforth emerge, everything that changes comes forth from a fire,[10] and what causes it to emerge is that its turn has come, in relation to what? What decides that the turn, that the moment has come? What decides that the moment has come is precisely the development of an active unity. We sense this: predication is the opposite of attribution since the predicate is fundamentally movement or change. Henceforth, substance is unity by itself.
So, I am ending by saying fine, let’s get back to this noise we have here.[11] Here I am… Suddenly, I tell myself that I had to have been hearing it for two terms (trimestres) this year. For two terms there has been this noise, but I was within pleasure, within the pleasure of talking to you. And this pleasure of talking to you is so intense that it was the sole noticeable perception in my soul. And certainly it [the noise] was a tiny perception; from time to time, it bothered me, but I didn’t even know what was bothering me. There was something bothering me, so I told myself, what is this? And at worst, I have perhaps reproached some innocents here [Laughter] by saying… But no, I didn’t know, I didn’t know. And then, a day arrives when, no doubt, that noise got louder. The noise became stronger; it changed its state, at last! This isn’t spontaneous, the sound, all that. Yes it is! There’s spontaneity in my passage. Something bothered me suddenly; suddenly? Not at all! I took the necessary time to create the integration of tiny concepts that I was dragging behind me for ages and ages, [Laughter] this little noise, this little noise, that was teasing my soul and that I hadn’t noticed.
And it’s the same thing for the dog. You sense henceforth how it appears, situated there infinitely ahead of you. But when we learn what a body is, we mustn’t be too surprised that this body and soul are, as he says, in pre-established harmony since – and this is like two series – since there will be the body series that, from instant to instant, never ceases causing the following moment of movement to result from the preceding moment and creating the integration of differentials. So [there’s] the stick that is carried, movement-translation, that is lifted, ascending movement, and that strikes down on me, the poor dog. And in the soul series of the poor dog, [there are] the tiny perceptions – you see, there is no communication, as Leibniz will say, there is no communication of soul and body – each one according to its series expressing a one and single thing. It’s like two projections of the same thing. Fine, there we are.
But I believe that really, at this level, in our first criterion, this was seeking a logical criterion. You recall, the logical criterion was, in Leibniz, it was simple: what does inherence or inclusion of the predicate in the subject mean? We saw this. What we didn’t see was in what way this was an absolutely new expression. We only saw that in Leibniz, despite appearances, the predicate couldn’t be an attribute. But only today are we able to judge the consequences of the opposition between the Leibnizian predicate and the Cartesian attribute, and how, in a word, the Cartesian substance is located entirely under the Classical sign of simplicity, whereas the Leibnizian substance is under the Mannerist sign of the unity by itself. [Break in the session]
You understand, what is bothering me a bit today is that I have had to tread on things we haven’t yet considered since I have already granted myself the existence of the body, about which we don’t know where it comes from, these bodies. Here… [Pause] So, it’s your choice here, it really depends on what shape you are in, either I continue in [what we are doing], with it being understood that this is difficult, but only a bit, or else I develop more of something general, something easy… I prefer to continue some more if you aren’t too… Are there any questions on this?… Yes?
Question (from a woman student): One question about a term. When you said that an apperception is an unnoticed perception…
Deleuze: Apperception, with a-p-p-e-r, is a conscious perception, in the sense of apercevoir (perceive), s’apercevoir (realize). Euh, for the text [reference], you’ll find it in Monadology, the distinction of tiny perceptions and of apperception. [Pause]
So let’s continue with the just a bit difficult. We’ve just seen the logical criterion, comparing substance in Descartes and Leibniz. In Descartes, once again, what I’ve said is obviously shameful to the extent that this was not my subject. I mean that I have only spoken insufficiently about it. Well, fine. I am saying, there’s an entirely different criterion as well, another play of criteria, that we could call epistemological. This time, what is it about? I’d say that in Descartes, if you consider Descartes, just as earlier, he defined substance through a Simple facet, so too it happens that, in other texts, he defines substance by the Complete facet by saying not that substance is something simple, but by saying that substance is something complete.[12] [Pause]
So what does that mean? Here as well, he gives a very, very precise sense, and he especially says – and Arnauld doesn’t understand. Arnauld doesn’t understand what he means. — In the objections that Arnauld made to Descartes, he returns frequently to this theme of the Complete, and he forces Descartes to explain himself, fortunately. And Descartes says, be very careful; don’t confuse the Complete with the Entire. I am not saying that substance is something entire. I am saying that, in fact, for Descartes, it is not Entire because there are modes, and modes are not of the substance. The Entire is the substance is quite different. [Pause] The Complete is a something that, first, I can think of as really distinct from another thing small b, [Pause] and second, when I think of it in this way, I think of it as distinct from every other thing, and it’s Complete in this sense. I think of it as really distinct from another thing small b, but by thinking of it as really distinct from another thing small b, I am thinking of it as really distinct from any other thing. Example… that is, it suffices unto itself as thought. Example: this time, I was telling you, the criterion of simplicity rests upon the distinction of reason, you recall; the criterion of completeness (complétude) rests on the real distinction. [Pause] The mind is substance, and what does that mean? From the point of view of completeness, that means [that] I conceive of it [the mind] as really distinct from extension, that is, I can deny in it all that belongs to extension, [Pause] and to the extent that I do so, I distinguish it from every other thing, [Pause] in this sense, the same as for extension. I’d say [that] extension and thought are really distinct. Descartes’s reasoning is precisely [that] two really distinct things, that is, conceived as really distinct, can be understood, can be conceived without one another. Second proposition: two things understood without one another are separable. [Pause] There we are. [Pause]
And Leibniz is going to insert himself between these two propositions, with violence, by saying that there is something wrong here. Once again, it’s always the same objection that Leibniz makes against Descartes: he goes too fast. Once again, he moved too fast. He didn’t have the right to conclude the second proposition from the first one. Why? Because two things understood without one another are separable, it’s true, says Leibniz. But what does that mean, two things understood without one another? It means that the requisites – you remember the notion of requisites – the requisites of one are distinct from the requisites of the other. [Pause] In the first proposition, let’s assume two really distinct things can be understood without one another. No, it’s not true. Two really distinct things, that is, conceived as really distinct, can be understood without one another, yes, but on one condition, the condition that they do not have the same requisites. And two things understood without one another… Two really distinct things can very well have the same requisites. Why? Because the requisites do not belong to the idea of two things or, in a certain way, don’t belong to it. In fact, you recall [that] these are limits; the requisites are limits and relations between limits.[13] [Pause]
The Cartesians’s response… Ah, this runs the risk of going badly because – see, here we have a topic for an argument, and what is the outcome of an argument? – The Cartesians’s response: Leibniz understood nothing because he forgets that they are speaking of substance, that is, of simple things. And, simple beings don’t have a requisite. [Pause] So, Descartes is right. [Pause] They run the risk of disagreeing as they aren’t talking about the same thing. Leibniz’s response: Substances are not simple beings. They are defined not by simplicity, but by unity, and that which is one by itself is perfectly endowed with requisites. [Pause] In other words, the second criterion of substance that, due to its usefulness, I am calling the epistemological criterion, consists this time, according to Leibniz, in defining substance by assigning its requisites, given that substance indeed has requisites, being not a simple being, but a being one by itself (être un par soi). This theme of requisites and of the argument between Descartes’s viewpoint and Leibniz’s viewpoint is located in the correspondence between Leibniz and Malebranche. [Pause] Ok? Is this ok so far?
So we are in a completely different domain. Now this is a matter of defining substance through requisites. We must expect to obtain from substance an entirely different definition than the first one. The first definition was unity by itself, that is, the interior unity of movement in the process of occurring or of active unity of interior movement. And so there we have that. We have to… It’s here that we have to make a little detour through Aristotle since what emerges from his own language, the substance as one and being defined by unity, it was already in Aristotle. Only, he didn’t understand unity, or change, or movement like Leibniz. And I return to our topic from the last meeting because it’s going to become quite important, and I’d like you not to forget it. When Leibniz reactivates Aristotle, I was telling you, he doesn’t undertake this resurrection without reason because, in fact, he completely changes Aristotle. He uses Aristotle, but in order to do what? [Pause] This corresponds completely to what I was telling you. I was saying that for me, at our last class when we were talking a bit about philosophy, about what it is to do philosophy, I was telling you that, for me, philosophy has never consisted in reflecting, for example, on science, but has consisted in creating the metaphysics of science. And it’s not at all a reflection on science, but a metaphysics provides the concepts corresponding to the functions of science, a condition that doesn’t yield concepts, but that discovers functions. And I was telling you, well it’s quite simple. It’s because there is a certain modern conception of movement in physics that Bergson elaborates his philosophical concept of duration. [Pause]
I find entirely the same theme in Leibniz. Leibniz says [that] physics has changed in very short time. Notably, Descartes’s physics of movement no longer stands. There is an entirely new physics of movement that’s in the process of being elaborated – this is a constant theme in Leibniz – with myself Leibniz, and with Newton, who are contemporaries. Newton and Leibniz are in the process of creating a new physics as well as a new mathematics, that renders, they say, where there are Cartesians givens (acquis), they base themselves on the Cartesian givens, but it’s a mutation, a mutation of physics and of mathematics. And Leibniz says, but this is the least of things. Each new physics and each new mathematics demand a new metaphysics. And this is a new metaphysics that will need to resuscitate something from Aristotle. It will need to go back to Aristotle; this won’t be a return to Aristotle. It will need some of the things that Aristotle discovered – and that Descartes was unable to conserve –, that he discovered as a function of his own physics, specifically that substance had requisites. So, this is why we have to make a small detour through Aristotle.
And how did Aristotle indeed proceed in his theory of substance, once he’d told us [that] substance is the unity of movement and unity of change? We’ll have to see; we’ll have to see in what ways this was not at all a version of Leibniz. But nonetheless, they had this point in common, indicating that they had an affinity, that they had connected with one another. Leibniz had a clear admiration for Aristotle; he couldn’t stand the way that Descartes had treated Aristotle. And they coincide, at least verbally, in the expressions, yes, substance is the unity of movement in the process of occurring, and substance is the unity of interior change. So, on this, they agree, despite conceiving of movement and change in completely different ways. But precisely, why is this in different ways? And I am going to try to relate to you the concept of substance for Leibniz, but I am going to do so like a story about Aristotle; I am getting everything mixed up!
Aristotle say, yes, change, what is change? Change is something strange; it’s the passage from one quality to another. Only there are quite a few philosophers before me, before Aristotle, who believed that what changed was a quality, that quality passed into its opposite, hot becoming cold, cold becoming hot. Aristotle says [that] physics, in the way he did it, excludes that completely. We’ve never seen hot become cold, nor cold become hot. As Aristotle says, this isn’t true, not that there aren’t other… [Deleuze doesn’t finish] He says, [Pause] this is some thing that becomes, that leaves the cold that it was, and becomes hot. In other words, there’s a third term. There are third terms, for the moment.
Why does this make me happy? You remember – now here, I really want to mix things up – you remember when I insisted, again in our previous session, when I tried talking generally about philosophy, and I told you [that] a concept, a philosopher is someone who creates concepts. It’s not someone who reflects on whatever topic. He creates concepts as a painter creates some object, as a scientist creates functions, etc. A philosopher creates concepts. Fine, it’s his métier. Someone who doesn’t create concepts, he can be everything you wish, but not a philosopher. Euh, fine… Today there are lots of people, and I see no problem with this, that call themselves philosophers and have never spoken a word of philosophy because they would be incapable of pointing to the slightest concept they’d created, once it’s stated that we don’t consider human rights to be a concept created by these philosophers.[14] [Laughter] So, this horizon is quite significant, but has nothing to do, either from near or far, with philosophy. If I were asked, in what way is Descartes a philosopher, I can explain it. If I were asked, in what way is Leibniz a philosopher, in what way is Whitehead, all that, I can answer such questions. There are a certain number of cases in which one can say that they are [philosophers], that they’re quite interesting. I don’t really know what they are, but in any case, they are not without merit. If they cannot say they are, well yes, if they cannot say they are, well, nothing prevents one from being extremely modest, if they cannot say it with great modesty, “I’ve tried to create a particular concept”. Even the great Albert Camus, I’ve never seen that he was in any manner a philosopher. But, in the end, all this is to allow me, I’d like to reach a sense of philosophy that allows me, not to say that philosophy is better than all the rest, on the contrary, it’s not the best, but that it doesn’t merit the… just as we don’t call just anything a painting, we don’t call just anything philosophy. And yet, and yet, this doesn’t prevent people from thinking.  A painter thinks; better still, my concierge thinks. Thinking is not necessarily doing philosophy. People think perfectly well without doing philosophy.
So fine, having said this… I was telling you, understand, a concept, inventing a concept is constituting a certain number of singularities. It’s really to verify this. In a certain way, can we say that the concept of substance is a concept that Aristotle created? On this [topic] then, a lot of discussion would be required. What are we calling creating a concept, because the very word [substance], for example, does the word and the thing… Does the word exist in Plato? Well, perhaps it does indeed exist, but is it a Platonist concept? That would mean saying that there’s a certain position in Plato’s system that connects a certain number of singularities specific to Plato. I’d lean toward the opinion, no, it’s not a Platonist concept although we can find… in any case, we can find the word [Greek word] or find [Greek word] in Plato, but this isn’t the same…[15] Let’s assume, I am saying – I don’t insist on this, it’s an idea – if I were told, I have the feeling that it’s Aristotle who invents the concept of substance, that belongs to… If I say, euh, if I ask Aristotle, what have you brought to philosophy? Why are you a great philosopher? He would answer me, my little man, I’ve at least invented the concept of substance, [Laughter] and many others. So, if I said, oh why would the world care about that? He’d say it’s quite simple for you; it’s not up to me to enrich it [word unclear]. Fine.
So, then, which singularities? I’m saying, here we are, I can immediately place Aristotle three singularities under the term “substance”, at first glance, right? There are no longer two of them; that is, there is not one quality that becomes another quality. There is a thing that receives two opposite qualities or that passes one quality into another quality. So there is the thing and the two qualities, a thing and two qualities. That’s what’s necessary for creating substance. [Pause] You see, it’s therefore three points. Obviously we cannot stay there. A second rather extraordinary analysis in Aristotle: what are the two qualities? – Ah, yes, let me be clear. At this level, let’s give them names. We’ll call the thing that passes from one quality to the other, the thing that receives and that is able to receive opposite qualities, we’ll call it matter. [Pause] This is logical. There’s no need to explain it. This works well. In fact, matter is what is able to receive heat and cold, white and black, all that. This makes sense. — But, to my knowledge, no one before Aristotle had said this, I am distinguishing matter and two qualities, and matter is the power (puissance) of receiving the two opposite qualities and of passing one to the other. You sense that we are fully into philosophy because we are in the process of organizing singularities.
A second moment of reflection, because this is not enough; we sense that it’s not enough. Second moment of reflection: the opposite doesn’t pass into its opposite. It is matter that passes from one opposite to the other. But then, what is the rapport of the two opposites? You see that this is a logic of contrariety. This confirms what I was telling you, and we already sense that distinctions will exist for Aristotle, but they will be subordinate to processes of contrariety. This is a logic of opposition, contrariety being one case, in fact, a privileged case. It matters little why; we’d have to explain the whole theory of opposition in Aristotle, that you will let avoid, that you’ll spare me. [It’s] not a question of being boring, but that I’d just talk about it too much. So, accept the idea that contrariety and opposition are the most perfect.
But in his taste for perfection as a philosopher, Aristotle wonders, but what is the most perfect form of contrariety? Is there a perfect contrariety? Yes, he says, it’s the contrariety of possession and privation, the contrariety of possession and privation. It’s the perfect contrariety. You’ll tell me, what are other opposites…and me too, because that would take us three more hours. But it’s quite fine; trust me on all this. Example: we indeed see what he means, I mean, because we’re not going to comment on this in a scholarly way. We’re looking for a very, very intuitive approach. It’s quite simple. Here we have two contraries, death and the living (le vif), that are not equal. One is more perfect than the other. It’s better to be living than dead. [Pause] Death is a quality according to privation, here, without life. But life is a quality according to possession. [Pause]
There we already have my three terms. I’ve made progress. My three terms are no longer matter and two contrary qualities. It’s matter, privation, possession. I am dying; this means [that] my body passes from possession to privation. I am born, etc. It’s the reverse passage, just like hot and cold. In Aristotle’s physics, he shows that cold is only a privation of hot. It’s hot that is the quality according to possession and cold is the quality according to privation. [Pause] In a splendid text, Aristotle will show that wine is a quality of water, and that the quality according to the corresponding privation is vinegar. [Laughter] This relates to an entire physics. If we’re told that this physics is outdated, this comment has strictly no interest since, on the other hand, what isn’t outdated is the concept. [Pause] So there he tells us, see that now, the three singularities interconnected through substance are matter, privation, possession. One is a quality according to privation; the other is a quality according to priva… euh, according to p… Anyway, I don’t know what I’m saying here; you complete it yourself.
A third degree of reflection: henceforth, matter is not only the power of receiving contraries. It’s not only the power of receiving two contrary qualities. [Pause] Insofar as it is only a power, [matter] itself is privation. Privation of what? Well, it doesn’t yet posses the quality according to possession. [Pause] And the quality according to possession, what is it henceforth? [Pause] It’s form. [Pause] What possession possesses is form, or that which possesses possession, is form. Form of what? Form that is realized or not in matter, [Pause] the bronze having become a statue, [Pause] or that which is in privation of form when the statue is scrapped or when the statue is not yet created. [Pause] I would therefore define form as that which is actualized in matter, and I would say what the form is in action (en acte), matter is in power (en puissance). [Pause] Which then gives me such a complex of singularities for the notion of substance: now, matter, privation, possession, [Pause] form, action, form being precisely action that is actualized in power. [Pause] For the moment, then, I have… [A student whispers: Five] five singularities. [Pause]
From this results finally two other singularities, and that will be all. If matter in itself, insofar as it is matter, is privation of form, I will call primary matter that which in action has a form, [Pause] whatever it might be, primary matter, that is, a pure matter. [Pause] But is there pure matter? Any matter, no doubt, has a form, while still being in privation in relation to another form. Example: it’s fine that organs are made of tissue. This is Aristotle’s biology. But tissue is already an unformed matter, already a matter that has a certain form. But it’s still in privation of an organ. [Pause] For the man working with iron, iron is an unformed matter. It’s a substance. It’s a matter and a form. There, it’s a pure matter, as if to be extracted. It’s a pure matter in the mine. And he already gives it a form, but for an earlier stage, it’s in privation of form. For example, for the artist who want to make a cup or a vase out of it, this will still be lacking a form. In other words, any unformed matter is still a matter in relation to a more elaborated form, right? We will call secondary matter the matter-form aggregate insofar as it lacks a more perfect form. [Pause] I am saying that any form, whatever it might be, actualizes the power of a matter. [Pause] In this sense, every form is an active unity.
I am summing up. I have, in order then, power (puissance)… Now, in final order: [1] power, something that is in power, and is defined by the power of receiving contraries, this is 1. Two: the contrary according to possession, this is form. [Pause] Three: [Pause] the form actualizes power, that is, form is an active unity. [Pause] – Have I already mentioned privation, yes? No? [Students’ voices: Yes! No, no…] This will continue… — Four, but I don’t know where to put it; I’ll put it… ? Oh, I don’t know. You’ll put it somewhere, privation, and primary matter, and secondary matter following the hierarchy of forms. [Pause] Besides, there are a few directions that this must turn: matter, power, action, form, euh… matter, possession, privation, primary matter, secondary matter.[16] There we have the aggregate of singularities that define the concept of substance in Aristotle.
Look at what there is in common with Leibniz. Substance is always evaluated in relation to change. Look at what there is in common with Descartes: form according to possession and the foreshadowing of an essential attribute. Something really strange is occurring here, and as a result, from Aristotle to Descartes, there are all sorts of currents that are already going to try to define substance through something similar to the essential attribute that will be Aristotle’s form according to possession. There are all sorts of passages, all that. But the other aspect, unity, unity of internal change, there is form as unity of internal change. This will be fully the direction that Leibniz will take up, and with what costs? We shouldn’t be surprised that Leibniz restores as well. You know, he says, I haven’t finished restoring lots of things in Aristotle. He’s going to restore the idea of primary matter and secondary matter, and in a completely new way. All this we can locate in, euh, in history.
And what does Descartes want? Get a sense of the purge that Descartes undertook in relation to Aristotle. What does he suppress? He suppresses power (puissance) since he considers that it’s a kind of, euh, nonscientific notion, everything is action (en acte). So, speaking of things that are in power, virtuality, all that is paganism, it’s the Middle Ages. So, [there’s] no question of there being power. Could there by any? No. [Hence] suppression of power. That’s how it is with Descartes, no problem. There’s no longer anything that resembles power. Extension is perfectly actual; it cannot be a power to receive forms, no. Therefore, suppression of power.
Second, suppression of privation. There’s no privation. What is going to replace privation? This is going to be the great thesis, and it’s what authorizes for him the theory of distinctions. There is no privation; there is delineation. There’s delineation. A thing is only what it is. It is never deprived of whatever it is. It’s limited. And this will be a thesis that you find everywhere. Or you very often find the word “privation” in texts of the seventeenth century, but you always find a context there that says, either explicitly or implied, that all privation must be understood as a simple limitation, the limitation of the creature that replaces all privation. It’s even why God is not responsible for evil. It’s the limitation of the creature. Moreover, we will see why it’s very important for Leibniz, this. So, no privation. We’ve reached: no more matter [sic], no more power, no more privation. So what’s left?
What’s left, yes, in a certain way, he would say this: form and matter. No more actions (actes), there are no more actions. What remains is form and matter, but so transfigured, so changed, since form will be what? It will be the essential attribute, essence, [Pause] and matter will be the thing, the res, that possesses this essential attribute and that cannot be deprived of it. You cannot deprive a body of any extension whatsoever. Simply, the body is limited, full stop, that’s it. You cannot deprive the mind of any thought whatsoever. You see, the concept of… I am not saying that the concept of substance for Descartes is less rich. I am saying that it is made of two singularities, two singularities. It’s not less rich because two newly adjusted singularities imply an entire critique of the other singularities. And the two singularities are: matter that is nothing more than a thing, and the essential attribute that is nothing more than an essence.
Henceforth, what is the difference between form and matter? It is not action-power (acte-puissance). A new type of rapport will have to be found. It’s not form that is action and matter that is power. It’s form that is [Pause] idea in the mind, idea in the mind that thinks, [Pause] and matter that is the position of the thing outside the mind. What is the difference between substance and the essential attribute? What is the difference between extension and the body? Between thought and the mind? This isn’t difficult. Extension is the essential attribute, that is, the idea that you create in your mind, and substance or the thing itself, which is called the res, is uniquely the attribute’s position outside the mind that thinks, that is, the position in existence.
What is going to happen for Descartes? There’s no point saying it: primary and secondary matter disappears, [and] with what problems and what consequences for Descartes? Well, with the consequences known to those who’ve read some Descartes. It’s the formidable problem in which he’ll find himself when it’s going to be a question of accounting for the intersection of soul and body, that is, must one introduce a third substance that will be the mix of soul and body, and what would be the status of this third substance? And with the third substance, aren’t all sorts of things reintroduced that he thought he had eliminated in reaction against Aristotle? It matters little.
And here emerges Leibniz – you can just end on this point – and who is also going to tell us, as did Aristotle, substance has a certain number of requisites – which cannot be known – and these requisites have nothing to do with the essential attribute that pleased Descartes so much. Moreover, substances have requisites in common such that there is nothing separated in nature. Notice here, directly against Descartes, there is nothing separable, even in nature, but as the Stoics say, everything conspires. You’ll tell me, but yes there are! Monads are separate since each contains the universe, they have nothing in common, and nothing passes between one another. But there is a prodigious idea and a very, very beautiful expression in a letter from Leibniz, a very, very beautiful formula, where he says, — euh, this cannot be translated, so… –Individual substances are monads, but are not, sed non monacheia, [Pause] but are not cells, monastic cells, that is, they are separate from one another, agreed, they don’t communicate with each other, agreed, but they express the same world, they each express the same world from its point of view. These are not monks’ cells. [Pause]
So fine, what are the requisites of substance going to be? I am going to state them in bulk because at our next meeting, we will see how to organize them. Here [Leibniz] is going to take up the analysis where he looks at Aristotle in reverse; it’s very odd. From Descartes, he keeps a fundamental point: there’s no privation, [but] there are limitations. In this way, he’s truly Cartesian, belonging to the seventeenth century. Only here we see, everything is power (puissance). Finally, there is only power. There is only power because far from power and action being opposed, [Pause] action is a power, [Pause] and the other power is limitation. There’s a power, limitation, that will be called passive power, [Pause] and there’s another power that will be called active power. Action is itself power. Every power is in action. Active power is action. In other words, form has become subject; it has stopped being essence. It has become one by itself. [Pause] So, we have primitive active power, primitive passive power. Primitive passive power is limitation or primary matter. It results necessarily, which he will show, it’s very, very odd, it will result necessarily in a secondary matter. [Pause]
So there will be an entire complex of properly Leibnizian singularities — active power, passive power, primary matter, secondary matter – that will be organized as a function of a new physics and a new mathematics. Each time, if I can say, there is an original concept of substance in Aristotle, there is an original concept of substance in Descartes, [and] there is an original concept of substance in Leibniz. This is a function, it seems to me, of these singular points that he organizes under the concept. Why keep the same word? It’s obvious that, in certain ways, it is called upon to fulfill the same function, a similar function, a function, I can say.
So good, I’d like you to reflect a bit on all this and the point we have reached, and the next time, I will try to explain this Leibniz organization.

Lecture 17, 12 May 1987: The Criteria of Substance, and “Having a Body”
So, let’s get to work. Is everything ok? Well, we are into the theme, that you recall perhaps, in which we could distinguish – but the texts are quite scattered — we could distinguish something like four great criteria of substance in Leibniz. Criteria of substance mean the ways of determining what substance is, and these criteria would be: the logical criterion, the criterion that I proposed to call (I don’t know if I’ve already said this) the epistemological criterion; the physical or physicalist criterion; and the psychological criterion. [Pause]  And, already, I can say that here all sorts of difficulties arrive for us. You will have them firmly in mind at the same time as we move forward a bit. These difficulties are only that these criteria often refer to one another and insert themselves into each other. And it’s surprising for us. Why? Because we haven’t yet felt any need to discuss the body. You remember? We felt the need to talk about events and monads, monads containing events specifically as predicates. But what are monads? They are souls or spirits. Why would the souls have bodies? We haven’t even touched on that.
So where does it come from, having a body? And what does having a body mean?[2] We have shown that monads indeed had a point of view. And we remained for quite a while on the idea of the monad’s point of view, and that a monad was inseparable from a point of view.[3] And perhaps we felt that having a body and having a point of view are not different things from one another. But what we do not at all see [is] what this consists of and why; no doubt, having a body means something other than having a point of view, even if the two things are connected. And in the end, all these criteria are going to put into play not only notions that could be called corporeal, but some new notions for us, and in this, I say frankly: we have to figure it out (il faut se débrouiller).
I am saying: we have to figure it out because it’s not at all a domain devoid of commentary; there is a lot of commentary on Leibniz, and some very great commentators. And then when one reads some, one feels the need — it’s a bit true of all philosophers, but perhaps it’s more particularly true for Leibniz — that one will perhaps not be able to grasp what the commentators mean if one doesn’t try to grasp it for one’s own purpose (à son compte), to work out how strange the notions can appear. At the point where we find ourselves, Leibnizian strangeness is going to be doubled, so much so that here again we will be led into taking risks in order to be able to say: that’s probably correct. But what I could propose to you is that if you see something else entirely, if you see a thoroughly interesting commentator, don’t necessarily believe him/her to be correct, but don’t necessarily believe that I am correct. We can say that [the] one [that] is right for each of us [is] the one that allows you to recognize yourself in this. And if you have another idea in order to recognize yourself, that’s the one that is the best. As I was telling you, there are some things that cannot be stated, but there are a lot more things that can be stated.
I was telling you [that] the logical criterion of substance [is] the one we are familiar with, and we said farewell to it somewhat the last time, but we said farewell to it in such a way that it hurled us into the problem of the body. That is what I already want to introduce, this new problem of the body. One of Leibniz’s most beautiful sentences is: “I thought I was in port, and I found myself thrown back into the open sea.” What is more beautiful? This is the very statement of philosophical method (démarche philosophique): one thinks one has arrived, and then there you are thrown back into the open sea.[4] I get the impression that “having a body” and the requirement of having a body operates precisely through this “being thrown back into the open sea”. And what we saw the last time for the logical criterion of substance, it seems to me, is – I am summarizing – relatively clear. Today more than ever, you [should] interrupt me if there is something obscure.
I was telling you [that] in Descartes, it’s relatively simple: the logical criterion of substance is simplicity, which is the same as saying that substance is defined by an essential attribute of which it is only distinct through a distinction of reason: body and extension, spirit and thought. And I was telling you at first glance – here, it’s a very good case of a notion, the extent to which one must be sensitive to the tonality of concepts – I was telling you [that] Leibniz will never define substance by simplicity. [Pause] He will indeed use the expression “simple substance”, but late in his work, and he will only use this expression when it’s a matter of distinguishing simple substance and monads, other things that he will call composite substances (substances composées). At that moment, he won’t say substance is simplicity, but will say: there are simple substances and there are composite substances. But he will never define substance by simplicity. On the other hand, he defines every substance by unity.
And we saw, in fact, that between simplicity and unity, there was a fundamental difference because unity was active unity of a something that moves or changes. Unity is interior to a movement or is the active unity of a change. One already senses that these two definitions are not entirely the same since, in the end, interior unity of a movement, what does that mean? Movement? Movement implies a motive (mobile). A motive is a body. What does the body have to do in all this, whereas up to now, we only talked about souls or spirits named monads? A soul or a spirit crosses through changes, yes, hence the definition: active unity of a change, active unity of a change interior to the monad, [which] causes us no difficulty. But the definition: unity of a movement that is necessarily exterior to the monad since it concerns a body – this creates a problem for us. The last time, we hid it, because we weren’t yet there, but we will have to rediscover this difficulty. What can that be? All that we can say is that qualitative change, interior to the monad, is deeper than movement; thus if we manage to understand what movement is, we will realize that its purposes are qualitative change interior to the monad.
Where does this body and motive come from? So I just say, let’s keep the definition: active unity of interior change. This is spontaneity, and if the interior change is the predicate of the monad, this is what happens in the monad. [Pause] We must say that there is at once spontaneity, that active unity of change signifies a double spontaneity: both the spontaneity of the substance that changes, and the spontaneity of change, that is, the spontaneity of the predicate. We saw spontaneity of the predicate consisted of: it was its property of moving into instant ‘b” from instant “a”; the necessity for instant “a” being full of instant “b”. [Pause]
And from this developed the opposition between Leibniz and Descartes, and in what form? You indeed see: the monad draws everything from its own depth through spontaneity. It draws everything from its own depth through spontaneity, an expression that you constantly find. And I remind you of the polemic with [Pierre] Bayle that seemed very important to us, in this respect.[5] What was it? The dog’s soul draws from its own depth the pain it feels when his body — again, its body being tossed in our faces – when its body receives a blow from a stick. And Leibniz’s very beautiful answer was: but be careful, do not consider abstractions; the dog’s soul doesn’t at all draw from its depth a pain that would suddenly occur, but rather the dog’s soul draws from its depth a pain that integrates into the soul thousands of tiny internal perceptions that defined its disquiet (inquiétude).[6] And I say here, weighing my words carefully, that I really believe that Leibniz is the inventor of animal psychology.
Animal psychology begins from the moment that, not only you believe in animals’ souls, but the moment in which you have defined the situation of this soul as the situation of being on the lookout (être aux aguets). When you take a walk in the country, you must play the following game, but also in the city: imagine that you are an animal. That means what, being an animal? That means that, whatever you do, being on the lookout to what might happen to you.[7] I would say that it’s what Leibniz calls disquiet in the New Essays on Human Understanding, perpetual disquiet: what animal has eaten in peace? He can have some peace, but the animal’s peace is integration of a perpetual disquiet: who is going to come steal my piece of I don’t know what from me? Look at the hyena’s disquiet, the vulture’s disquiet. Look at how an animal rests, everything. In this light, we see the extent to which Leibniz is right; he’s the first to have seen that, to have said: obviously animals have a soul!
Why does he say that against Descartes? It’s not that we can consider animals as machines; for those who know Descartes somewhat, there is the famous theory of animal machines. We can always… these are models of construction. But what will the machine be missing? What will be missing is the animal disquiet (l’inquiétude béstiale), notably that one can reconstruct with artificial models anything of the animal that one wants; one can have a robot eat, etc…. One can also cause it signs of disquiet, yes, [and] at that moment, one will know in a certain way that the animal is something other than a robot.
And you can play this out in the countryside, it’s more suitable than in the city: you place yourself in a field, and you tell yourself out loud: I am a rabbit [Laughter] (or something else if you don’t like rabbits), and you try to imagine a little of what the life of these animals is like. But a gunshot doesn’t strike them, which is what confirms so much that Leibniz is correct: a gunshot doesn’t strike them just like that. The pain of a gunshot, but it happens suddenly, literally, like integrating a thousand tiny solicitations of ambiance, specifically: the confused tiny perception that hunting is underway. They heard the gunshots; moreover they heard the hunters calling out: “Hey, Toto, did you see one of them?” They don’t get it, but there is a special voice for hunting and the hunters. They saw these people crossing [the field] in their own way, there is a particular hunter’s gait; these animals are on the lookout. And what Leibniz proposes to us, and also answering Bayle, is the idea that when I say that the soul spontaneously produces its own pain, I simply mean, he says, it does not receive the same impression of pain as [one] coming suddenly with nothing to prepare it. The impression of pain comes to integrate suddenly a thousand tiny perceptions that were there, and that could have remained non-integrated. At that moment, the rabbit might have finished eating its carrot, that is, taking pleasure; but whether it’s a man’s monad or an animal’s, you see this kind of change in the monad occur in its depth.
And I was telling you, henceforth, there is a way to provide the concept of Mannerism with a certain consistency in philosophy. And I was telling you, Leibniz is really the first great philosopher, I believe, to have initiated this theme of the depth of the soul. Through this, the Romantics will perhaps remember Leibniz, but before that, the depth of the soul was hardly discussed, or else when one talked about it, it was as an image, whereas it’s in the status of the soul, “It draws everything from its very depth,” [and] that’s what the monad is. So I was telling you: the Mannerist couple is depth-spontaneity, in opposition to the Classical couple from Descartes: form-essentiality. [Pause]
But then let’s continue a little more to finish up with this first criterion. This first criterion is inherence, as you recognized; we worked it over so much.[8] This first criterion is inherence, you know, specifically the predicates are in the subject or, if you prefer, each monad expresses the world. Each monad expresses the whole of the world, or the world is in each monad. You remember [that] this is inclusion. We have an ultimate confirmation, I was telling you: but be careful [since] predication has generally been confused, in Leibniz, with attribution; it’s precisely the opposite, it’s precisely the opposite, since the judgment of attribution is the rapport attribute-substance [Pause] to the extent that the attribute determines the substance’s essence. [Pause]  Inherence is absolutely different: it’s inclusion of the predicate in substance to the extent that substance draws the predicates and the succession of predicates from its own depth. The predicate is not the attribute; it is event. [Pause]
So I assume that all this is clear. That’s what the logical criterion of substance is, opposed in Leibniz to the Classical criterion of substance such as you find it in Descartes, that is, substance-essential attribute. But I am taking advantage of this to push forward a bit. Henceforth, even at this level, I define substance through inclusion: it’s what includes the aggregate of predicates as events, or the aggregate of predicates as change. [Pause] So it’s the active source of change, the active unity of change, change being opposed in Mannerism to the fixed and solid attribute of substance. In this, it’s, on the contrary, a living source of change.
So therefore, here’s the question that I am asking, so I ask it first in Latin, to convince you even more: and why wouldn’t everything stop there, that is, why wouldn’t every thing be a percipit of substance, of the monad? A percipit: what does that mean? It means a perceived being, Percipere means to perceive; percipit is being perceived.[9] [Pause] The monad expresses the universe and includes it; each monad includes the universe. Its predicates are changes, or from one predicate to another there’s change. Leibniz will tell us that perceptions are the actions of substance. I insist on this because that will be important for us later. We might have thought it easier to say that perceptions were what substance received. You see that this cannot be said unless one understands nothing. No one can tell us that the substance receives: it receives nothing. It is whole in itself. Leibniz is the last philosopher who can say that substance receives perceptions; it’s an active unity.
And in one among other texts, Leibniz doesn’t forget it: [Pause; Deleuze looks into his edition]  “The action characteristic of the soul” – action – “The action characteristic of the soul is perception and the unity of what it perceives” — that is, the substance — “comes from the link of perceptions according to which the ones that follow are derived from the ones that precede.” We have seen according to which laws those that follow are derived from those that precede: those that precede have to be generated (grosses de) from those that follow. We have seen that the dog’s pain wasn’t… rather that the pleasure the dog has from eating was generated by the pain it was going to endure when it gets struck by the blow from a stick. On the other hand, the tiny perceptions that preceded the blows from the stick are generated by the pain [the dog] is going to endure.
So, why not say: there are neither things nor bodies? There is the monad and its perceptions. The world is what the monad perceives, that is, it’s what is in the monad. Henceforth, the world is uniquely the “being perceived” of the monad; it’s what is perceived by the monad. And I could say: “being” (être) is either being a monad or being perceived by a monad. Being is being perceived. This is what would be known as an idealist system. Everything pushes us toward it since, you remember, the world does not exist outside the monads that express it or include it. The world does not exist outside the monads. We have to hold onto this, we have to return to this. You recall our schema: the world is perhaps the virtual horizon of all monads; it doesn’t prevent them from not existing outside such and such and such and such monads, [outside] the number = x of monads that include it. It’s what has been called for ages “idealism”.
Henceforth, there are no things; there are perceptions. There aren’t stick blows; there are pains. This is what Bayle says very well to Leibniz: but what’s the need of bringing in a stick blow? There isn’t any stick; there aren’t any stick blows; there isn’t any dog body; what would be changed? [End of cassette ; interruption of the Web Deleuze transcript]  You understand? What would be changed? Absolutely nothing. You’d have the dog’s soul that would feel pleasure. There wouldn’t be a meal, but it would experience pleasure, the same pleasure that it would otherwise feel. [Return to the Web Deleuze transcript]  God can do all, so why would God have made bodies, something very tiring, when he could have only made spirits and souls? Nothing would have changed: the dog would feel pleasure, it would endure all the tiny forms of disquiet we were talking about, and then the pain would integrate these tiny forms of disquiet. All of that happens in the soul, so there is no need for there even to be a real stick. There would be the perception of food, and the perception of food would not exist outside the perception of food. “Esse” would be for a body or an object, esse, being, would be percipit, that is, being perceived.
You understand. I thought I had reached port. The monads give an account of the totality; they give an account of whatever you want. It’s enough to say: there are only monads. And yet, Leibniz never thought of saying that, never. So that poses a problem for us: he could have said it, if it’s true that he wanted to say it. Moreover, there’s someone else who said it, so that complicates things: it’s [George] Berkeley. I will give you some easy Berkeley, but he is renowned for introducing the formula “esse est percipi” and for having founded a new kind of idealism according to which there are only souls or spirits.[10] And at the start of his philosophy, he himself presents his enterprise by saying: there are only Irishmen – Berkeley was Irish; [Laughter] I find this very important because, first, this creates a link to Beckett, [Laughter] who was admirably familiar with Berkeley; he knows Berkeley very, very well, and yes then, since there’s a little film by Beckett, the little marvel that Beckett created in cinema is placed under the sign “esse est percipi”; that is,  this is Beckett’s response to Berkeley, but this isn’t why I am making this connection. Berkeley spent his time saying: you Irish, at least in his first works. He does not say this maliciously; he means: there is a thing (truc) in what I am saying that only an Irishman can understand. So, that interests me a lot because that would truly establish the relation of philosophers and philosophy with nationalities. He saw himself as creating a philosophy for the Irish, for the use of the Irish.[11]
Fine, esse est percipi. This is what he presents in another way as a double transformation, the double transformation of things into ideas and ideas into things, or, if you prefer, into sensible impressions, and sensible impressions into things. What is the table? [Deleuze raps hard on the table] It’s the percipit, it’s being perceived. It matters little what Berkeley means; that becomes quite complicated, etc. … No matter, that doesn’t concern us. But what does concern us is that Berkeley’s first books come out around 1714, and that, having a great mental curiosity, Leibniz reads them. What’s really interesting is Leibniz’s reaction from his reading, a very fast reading, I think; we have some [of his] notes. We have notes of Leibniz reading Berkeley who, at that moment, was a very young philosopher. Leibniz’s first reaction is not good; he says: this is an extravagant Irishman! [Laughter] This young man is really extravagant; he is saying things to make himself interesting; he says “esse est percipi”, [and] this is not serious. And then, in a more interesting way, in his notes, he re-writes them, he indicates that this [the expression] suits him entirely, and that he could have said this. I am not saying he said it, but he could have said it. We’d have to see in what sense he could have said it. But precisely, he does not say it and will not say it. My first question is: why doesn’t he say it whereas the first criterion of substance would allow him to say it?
So this is how I end the analysis of the first criterion of substance; all of that has to be quite orderly so that you recognize how much all of it is very complicated. I end with: we are thrown back into the open sea. Why is it that as an outcome of this first criterion, Leibniz doesn’t wake up, despite his old age, why doesn’t he wake up as a Berkleyian, that is, saying there are only monads and their perception, such that bodies and things are simple percipits? There are only souls or spirits, or their perceptions.
Here, I would like for you to remember certain things: [Pause] each monad, you and me, we express the entire world. Notice that Berkeley never would have said that, and you have to feel why Berkeley never would have said that. We express the whole world to infinity, each of us expresses it, and the world does not exist outside all of us who express it. But you recall: each of us has a tiny privileged region, what Leibniz calls one’s subdivision (département), one’s zone, one’s neighborhood. But what is this? It’s the portion of the world that we express clearly, or as Leibniz says in a rather more mysterious way: distinctly; or as Leibniz says in a more general way: that we express specially (particulièrement). Here the vocabulary is already really interesting to study: specially, clearly, distinctly, a tiny part of the world, which is a finite portion: our subdivision, our neighborhood. And on this point I told you: well yes, you have your tiny little zone, for example, the time in which you are living, the milieu in which you are evolving, etc.: that’s the clear portion of what you express. And as much as you express the infinity of the world, you equally only express a limited portion clearly. This limited portion is your finitude [Pause] or, if you prefer, your limitation. Why is it your limitation? Because it’s what distinguishes you from God. If God is a monad, it’s because, on one hand, it expresses all the monads, even incompossible between them, and on the other hand, in the world it chooses, it expresses clearly and distinctly the infinite totality of this world. [End of the BNF cassette] God has all the subdivisions at once. So what defines the limitation of a monad like you and me, of a finite monad, the finitude of a monad, is the fact that it only expresses clearly a tiny portion of the world. [Return to the BNF recording]
Let’s translate; let’s try translating. What do I express clearly in the world? Perhaps you recall [that] I insisted on this quite a bit: in Leibniz, the predicate, what is contained in substance, is so much less an attribute since, in fact, it is always an event or a rapport. An event is an especially complex rapport, as we saw when analyzing Whitehead, in his relations with Leibniz. But a predicate is always a rapport. This why it is not an attribute, which is always a quality. And this is why it’s so disastrous: believing that the judgment of inclusion in Leibniz is a judgment of attribution, since one understands absolutely nothing at all about what a predicate is for Leibniz if one states that a predicate is a rapport and can be only a rapport. Fine.
What do I express clearly? There is an expression that summarizes everything, so why not use it? And here we’re going to use it, and while it should simplify everything for us, it will also complicate everything for us. Tough (tant pis); we will be thrown back into the open sea. It would surely be very simple and precise to say: well yes, the zone that I express clearly is what concerns my body. What I express clearly, in the world, is what relates to my body. We again find the idea of rapport. The clear predicate included in the monad, or the aggregate of clear predicates that defines in particular my subdivision, my zone, my neighborhood, is the aggregate of events that pass through my body. This is what I am especially destined to express, and to express particularly. It seems to us that this wasn’t complicated to say. But precisely, why didn’t [Leibniz] say it? Why didn’t he begin by saying it? Why does he say it in the Letters to Arnauld, [where] he says, and yes: “What the monad expresses clearly is what has a rapport with its body.”[12] There we note that the monad has a body. [Pause]
For example, the monad Jules Caesar: it clearly expresses all sorts of things, but note well [that] everything it expresses relates to his body. Even for the monad Adam, everything that it expresses, all that it especially expresses — being the first man, being in a garden, having a wife born from his rib – all that is what has a rapport with his body. And you will find nothing in your clear expressions that doesn’t have a rapport with your body, which does not mean that what you clearly express would be phenomena of your body. That’s how it gets complicated. That’s where we start beginning to swim. For it seems incontestable to me that what I express clearly is what has a rapport with my body. But what happens in my body, my body itself, I don’t express it clearly at all. I cannot say that I clearly express the movements of my blood, and moreover, if there is something that is obscure to me, it’s my body. So it happens that here we have something so obscure that is, at the same time, [Pause] that which is in a relation with what allows me to perceive clearly.
You sense that one has to have a strange status of the body, and you especially sense that we have the embryo of an answer (embryon de réponse). Then, the fact of having a body means it must be in rapport with tiny perceptions, and the tiny perceptions are obscure and confused. What I express clearly, the clear, is when I integrate tiny perceptions. So I draw on something clear, from this whole obscure depth. Drawing on something clear from an obscure depth is a rather strange operation. In Descartes, that never happens. It’s properly Leibnizian: the clear is what is drawn from an obscure depth. Moreover, there is no clarity that isn’t drawn from an obscure depth. It’s been said that it’s a Baroque conception of light, in opposition to the Classical conception. But we’re not going to get back into that; all of that is very coherent.
You see, invoking the body is going to cause us all kinds of problems, but what I am saying is this: Notice the order in which we can invoke it. Here’s my question: can I say I express, yes or no? Can I say that me monad, me spirit, that I especially or clearly express a region of the world because I have a body and because it’s that region that concerns my body or what is in rapport with my body? In other words, is it, or rather, in the same words — I’ll start this over –:  Is it because I have a body that I clearly express a part of the world that has rapport with this body? Radical answer: No, impossible! Why impossible? Because Leibniz wouldn’t be Leibniz, because we wouldn’t be talking about Leibniz; we would be talking about something else. We’d be talking about a philosophy that would have long before already explained what a body was. And we saw that the path is even the reverse. What is it we have to say? Well I have no choice, but I really prefer the second proposition to the first; it’s more intelligent. We have to say: I have a body because my soul clearly expresses a tiny region of the world. It’s the only thing that I can say.
That I have a subdivision, that is, that my soul clearly expresses a tiny region of the world, it’s the sufficient reason for having a body, enabling me to then say: yes, what I clearly express is what has a rapport with my body, for a very simple reason: it’s that my body deduces from the clear region that I express. In other words, what I should create is a genesis of the body. This genesis of the body forbids me from starting off from [the body]. Someone could ask me: do I have a body all the time? Yes, I have a body all the time. You remember perhaps: before being born I had a body, after my death, I have a body. The question isn’t if I have a body all the time. The question is: what derives from what? And my order is set. Why do I express a tiny little region, whereas I express the entire world, but obscurely? Why do I clearly express a tiny region? We saw that you can’t respond: “because I have a body.” On the contrary, it’s because I clearly express a tiny region that I, henceforth, have a body. Genesis of the body. Hence the necessity of the question: why do you express a tiny clear region since it’s not because you have a body; it’s the opposite, it’s bec… no, shit! It’s the opposite… Anyhow, you got it! [Laughter]
We saw the answer, if you recall! We saw that each monad was constructed in the neighborhood of a small number of singularities; each monad is constructed around a certain number of singularities extensible (prolongeables) into other singularities, all the way into the neighborhood of other singularities.  But each monad is constructed around a certain number of principal singularities. I express the world because the principal singularities, around which I am constituted, extend themselves in every direction toward the others, and into the neighborhood of other singularities. [Pause]  But I am constructed around a small number of privileged singularities. For Adam, it’s: being the first man, being in a garden, having a wife born from his rib, [we could] find some others. [Laughter] Each one’s soul is a condensation (condensé) of a limited aggregate of singularities. Why does it express the unlimited world? Because these singularities extend themselves all the way into the neighborhood of all the other singularities, but each of us is constructed around a small number of singularities. It’s because each of us is constructed around a small number of those singularities that I move forward a little: the answer is never given straight out by Leibniz, and I will alert you when…  But what seems to me suggested by the texts, suggested in as strong a way as if I had said it, so he said it, but he said it in texts that haven’t reached us. But they don’t exist any less; they will exist one day. And then, then it’s a given (forcé): it seems to me other answers are impossible. However, it’s not far off. But in the end, it matters little. I should never have said that…
You see the genesis. First proposition: certainly each monad expresses the whole world, but each individual, what does being an individual monad mean? It’s concentrating, concentration, a word that Leibniz uses: concentration of a limited aggregate of singularities. I don’t express the world any less for this, because, once again, these singularities are extensible all the way into the neighborhood of all the other singularities. So, first proposition: I am constructed in the neighborhood of a certain number of singularities, or of a determined aggregate of singularities. Second proposition: henceforth, that’s the reason why I express a determined portion of the world, the one that links constitutive singularities. But I express the entire world in a confused way, that is, all the singularities of the world chosen by God. But I make my neighborhood, or my subdivision, from the portion of the world delimited by my constitutive singularities. Third proposition: I have a body because I express a privileged region, [Pause] and thus, I could say: my privileged region is what has a rapport with my body, [End of cassette; interruption of the Web Deleuze transcript] the privileged region of my spirit, that which has a rapport with my body.
With this, I’m thrown into all kinds of problems, notably how to explain that my body is only perceived obscurely by my monad. I content myself solely with this: each monad has a body and must have a body. Each monad has a body, I don’t know. No, all that I can say is the each monad ought to have a body. It ought to have a body since the requirement of having a body results from the clear portion that I express. There we are, I’ve completed the first point. Henceforth, notice that when I introduced the monad in the first point as the unit of movement, it was justified to the extent that I have a body and that, henceforth, there are bodies. [Pause] Why not a lone body? That we shall see, because the law of the body is precisely to submit to the actions of other bodies. And it doesn’t matter. There we have the first point. It has to be very clear. This is clear : if I reverse the order, in my opinion, this would no longer be Leibniz. If you start off from the body, it’s ruined. [Pause] Understand? This is a genetic deduction of the body that he proposed to us at this level. [Pause] No problems? … Yes?
Question: [Inaudible, due to ambient noise in the classroom]
I am going to tell you that you aren’t yet even severe enough. In all rigor, on this level, what I can say is that it’s not even that animated beings have a body. What I can say is that reasonable souls have a body. I can’t even say anything else; I can’t say anything else because [Return to the Web Deleuze transcript] we started off from the monad. For the moment, the monad, for us, is a spirit that expresses the whole world under the auspices of reason, that is, it’s you or me. We’ve encountered animals; we’ve encountered animals, but we don’t know what that is. We have encountered them in some way because we made them intervene. We don’t know what that is. And things… the example loved so much by Leibniz, for your pleasure: the rainbow, all that. Animals and phenomena of different kinds, light, rainbows, etc. – you sense that they have to belong — and your question is quite correct — that they have to belong to the genesis. They have to emerge at a moment… which moment? We don’t know, we don’t know at which moment.
Second criterion of substance, substance still being taken as a monad presented as spirit of a reasonable being. We have just seen that by virtue of the first criterion, the monad as spirit of a reasonable being must have a body. And why must it have a body? It must have a body because it expresses a privileged subdivision in its total expression.
Second criterion, the epistemological criterion. Why do I call it the epistemological criterion? As we saw, it’s because I insisted on the originality of Leibniz’s logic that consists of calling for a definition as function of the requisites of the thing. And what are the requisites of the thing? It’s already something very new: these are the constitutive conditions of the thing. We have to distinguish the constitutive conditions of the thing from the constitutive parts. [Pause] The requisites are not among the constitutive parts; these are conditions that the thing must obey in order to be what it is. [Pause]
And we saw, on this point as well, that Leibniz clashed with Descartes, since the second criterion of substance for Descartes was, you recall, real distinction, two things being conceived without one being thought while causing elements of the other to intervene.[13] [Pause] For Descartes, two really distinct things, that is, things thought as really distinct, we saw that it was the same thing, that it was always a question of thinking within the real distinction, and well, that two things thought as really distinct were separable. [Pause] Descartes would be able add: furthermore, that which is separable is separated, and that’s another matter. If what is separable is separated for Descartes, it’s because, otherwise, God would be an imposter (trompeur); he would make us think of things as being separable, and he would not separate them. So he would be lying to us. [Pause]
Leibniz answers a second time: no! He says: what Descartes did not see was that two things can be really distinct, that is, thought as really distinct, and nonetheless have the same requisites, that is, have the same constitutive conditions. And two things that have the same requisites can be really distinct, and yet they are not separable. And Leibniz’s grand idea is that nothing is separable in the world. [Pause] Example: monads. They are really distinct; one can be thought without the other. That does not make them separable, and moreover they are inseparable. Why? Because they have the same requisites. Which requisites? The common world that they express: each from its point of view expresses a one and same world; they are really distinct since the points of view are really distinct. You can think the monad Caesar without thinking anything about the monad Alexander. That doesn’t change the fact that they aren’t separable, they have the same requisites; they express a one and same world. And this singular requisite, all the singularities of a same world, must indeed express itself in general terms, that is, from the point of view of a logic of requisites – what are we going to say?
We saw it the last time: it’s there that [Leibniz] creates his great reactivation of Aristotle in order make fun of Descartes. Descartes thought that he had done away with Aristotle and with Aristotelian abstractions that consisted of telling ourselves: substance is composed — you see it was rather distant from Leibniz, the component parts — substance is composed from a matter, from a form and from an aggregate of matter and form. [Descartes] added: matter is the power (puissance) of accepting opposites; that’s what change is, hence substance is a unit of change. This was close to Leibniz: matter is the power of accepting opposites. One of these opposites is: possession of the form. Henceforth, form is the act that causes power to pass into act, it’s the form that actualizes power, and matter without form is privation. Hence the condition under which you think the trio matter-form-component of both, this is the distinction, it’s the opposition possession-privation. It’s an entire aggregate of requisites of substance.
And there we see what [is] in [Leibniz’s] project, which is both to hold onto, once again, the acquired elements of Cartesianism in order to turn them against Descartes and to reactivate Aristotle; that’s how Leibniz is going to return to the problem and present it as a problem of the requisites of substance. This is the most difficult point of what I have to tell you today, so we are going rather slowly. For substance to exist, there first must be an active unity. We saw that this was linked to the first criterion.
But you saw this, we can draw it, we can extract it from the first criterion since unity could also be as much a unity of movement as a unity of change interior to the monad. For substance to exist, there must in any case be a unity, active unity of spontaneity. [This is] what we will call substantial form, or according to an Aristotelian term – that I don’t have the time to define, otherwise we’d get all lost in this, but if you run into it, don’t be disturbed — perfect act, that is, Entelechia. [Deleuze spells it out] The perfect act or Entelechia, the completed substantial form or perfect Entelechia, the substantial form, Entelechia: it is this active unity, that is, what is called for the moment: monad. It’s spontaneity. We will call it active and primitive power (puissance).[14] You already see that power is no longer opposed to act, but power passes into act, and it needs nothing else than itself to pass into act.
Active and primitive power. Why? Because it does not cause a power or a matter to pass into act; it is in itself the power of action (puissance d’agir): this is going to be — and Leibniz borrows it from the Renaissance, that is, from Aristotelians who have singularly changed the rapport power-action –, specifically, power is itself power of action (puissance d’agir). There is no longer an act that actualizes a power of action; there is a power that passes into action, if nothing blocks it. This is why that it is called: power (puissance). If nothing blocks it, it passes into action. Spontaneity of active power. Hence [there is] the splendid expression for Nicolas of Cusa, a Renaissance philosopher to whom Leibniz owes much, when he speaks of “possest”. For those who know some Latin, possest is a word composed of “posse”, power (pouvoir), and “est”, is. That means precisely: the power (puissance) that is not power of Being, but the power which IS, the power which is act, the power in action, the possest. In Leibniz, once again you see this term constantly: active and primitive power. You see that it is not a form, substantial form, but this is not a form that acts on a matter; it is a form – Leibniz will say – of which all the actions are internal. If nothing blocks it, it passes into act. Quite often Leibniz will tell us that the monad, by definition, has only internal actions. It is active, and all its actions are internal. Why? By virtue of the principle of inclusion, by virtue of the principle of inherence.
Thus there is an active power (puissance) because the act does not exert itself over an exterior matter, but power is in act (en acte) since all its actions are internal. [Pause] I would say: substantial form was identified by Leibniz with the substance as subject, that is, with the monad, that is, with active power of which all the passions are internal. [Pause]  You have seen it: what are the internal actions of the monad? These are its perceptions. The perceptions are the actions of the monad.[15] [Pause]
Only there we are, the second requisite: it is true that our difference with God is that we are limited. And as we saw — in this as well, this is entirely clear in itself — we saw that in Leibniz, just as there was an absolute revision of the rapports power (puissance)-act, there is also a renunciation of the opposition privation-possession. To the benefit of what? Of limitation. [Pause]  Our sole privation is that we are limited. We are limited because we are creatures: monads are limited. But it’s not because we are limited that we still don’t have infinite actions, Leibniz will say; this is something else. But in any case, because we are limited, we only have a very partial region of clear expression. The mark of limitation in the monad is precisely that we have a single subdivision. Limitation does not prevent action. [In] another letter: [Pause]  “I answer that even when it” – substance — “is blocked”  — that is, when its active force, its active puissance is blocked — “it simultaneously exerts infinite actions for, as I have already said, no blockage can completely suppress action”. Afterwards considerations about the body come. This is constantly marvelous.
Fine. The monad is limited. This is the second requisite; the first requisite is: active and primitive power (puissance). To limitation, Leibniz will give the name primitive power, but now passive. [Pause]  Only here’s the problem: how does he define the limitation? [Pause] That’s very important because, staying with the point of view of genesis where we are now, out of [scholarly] rigor I refer to the Letters to Father Des Bosses, like a “bosse” [hump] in two words, letters from the end of his [Leibniz’s] life, so we can consider that they express the final state of his thought. He never stops telling us: limitation is requirement. Limitation is requirement of what? It’s the requirement of extension (étendue) and – a rather mysterious word — of antitype, which is resistance or inertia. For reasons that we will perhaps see later, Leibniz thinks that extension is itself incapable of taking account of inertia and resistance.
So, these aren’t two things, and we know about it since it’s not the same thing. We saw this, you recall, so I remind you of it quite briefly: extension is a series, it’s an infinite series whose parts are organized according to the rapports of whole-parts,[16] and that tends towards no limit, [Pause] whereas resistance or antitype is the limit toward which something tends, in the extension, [Pause] that enters into a convergent series. But no matter. Leibniz tells us: limitation is a requirement, or it’s the requirement of extension or antitype, or the requirement of extension and resistance. He will call it mass, but as one commentator notes, Latin has two words for “mass”. What he calls mass, in Latin it’s “moles”, and he indicates: mass without form. In fact, this mass without form – you see why it’s without form? It’s not even extension, it’s not even resistance, and it’s a requirement. In other words, it’s a requisite in pure state. If you say, this is where extension intervenes, you would be wrong; extension surely does not intervene there. This is where there is a requirement of extension. Limitation is one requirement of extension and of resistance, understanding this as resistance to movement, but we don’t know, or resistance to change. We will say, requirement of extension… [Pause]  If I remain here, we’ll say: the monad as substance, as spiritual substance, has two requisites: [Pause] substantial form or Entelechia or active primitive power (puissance), and limitation [Pause] or requirement of extension or of resistance. If you want to draw more from this, you do not have the right, in my opinion; for the moment, it’s blocked off. We cannot say more about it. A problem remains, you can always analyze this requirement. I can already tell you where it would come from, and that is going to commit us. Perhaps I’ll need to repeat it to you.
Very quickly, I say, this story is quite significant, so that you will feel a bit of the deep coherence. You recall that each monad has a point of view. The point of view already allows [us] to define something that we have not talked about at all, what Leibniz calls space, specifically (we can only say it in Latin, otherwise we will get all mixed up) in Latin: spatium. The spatium strictly has no physical reality and does not concern bodies. The spatium is a logical order, the order of coexistent points of view, places being points of view. [Brief interruption of the BNF recording] What is the requirement of extension and of resistance? It’s the diffusion of places. [Pause] It’s a consequence of spatium. It’s still not a question of extension. It’s a requirement of extension, a requirement of antitype. [Pause] [Return to the BNF recording]
At the outside, I can say what? Limitation, this requirement of extension, in the end what is it? The limitation of each monad is the fact that there are several monads, the fact that there is an infinity of monads. I would almost say: my limitation is the shadow of other monads onto my own. Everything starts through the shadow. Notice that my situation is not brilliant! The shadow of other monads onto my own: wouldn’t this be a way of getting back to something, [so] I repeat the question: what is my limitation? I repeat the question each time to give another answer. My limitation is the fact that I clearly express only an entirely tiny portion of universe, and the rest lies in my obscure depths. My limitation is the obscure depth of my soul.
Fine. What is the obscure depth of my soul? I can start over: it’s the fact that I cannot clearly express anything but a tiny portion. Why can I only express a tiny portion? We saw this. But the ultimate answer is because there are other monads. In other word, what causes the obscure depth of my soul? The shadow that other monads cast over me. It’s your shadow that creates my obscure depth, [End of cassette ; interruption of the Web Deleuze transcript] as a kind of revenge. [Pause] We don’t communicate otherwise. It’s really marvelous. This is Leibniz, you remember? Monads are without doors or windows. They do not communicate with each other because they have strictly nothing to say to each other. They have strictly nothing to say to each other; they all express the same world from their point of view, each from its point of view. Each has only a small portion of clear expression, a small subdivision, its neighborhood, fine. I have my neighborhood, you have yours. All the rest is the dark depth within each of us. We, we – what is the word when one gets one’s feet really muddy? I no longer know —  anyway, we [Return to the Web Deleuze transcript] — We wallow in this obscure depth, we slog. And what is this obscure depth of your shadow over me? The only thing that you might give me. Note that it’s impressive: giving a bit of shadow to others, what’s more beautiful? I have to have this obscure depth; it’s absolutely necessary. [Gap in the Web Deleuze transcript] [A student near Deleuze : Diogenes wouldn’t have liked that] Diogenes, wouldn’t have liked that? Oh, he’d have gotten used to it. I don’t know. It’s his… In any case, there’s no reason to criticize, not at all, because it’s… The dark depth is necessary. It is absolutely necessary to prevent me from being just any being (un être quelconque).  [Return to the Web Deleuze transcript] I must have all that, all this shadow on me. You understand?
So I would say: the requirement of extension or antitype is so little extension or antitype; it hasn’t yet become such, and in all rigor, it is the shadow that all the other monads cast onto each other. In this very way, it constitutes the obscure depth of each monad. You see that we never get out of it. I have to have a body, but in the genesis, we are not even at the requirement of a body, but the requirement of something [Pause] that I might be able to name extension and inertia. And I can only analyze this requirement. And I would say, with my first two requisites, I would say: active primitive power (puissance) and active passive power are the two requisites of the substance called monad, substance that I can call: simple substance, now that all danger is cast out since I know that “simple” does not define the substance; what defines the substance is the two requisites. I can add: limitation is not separable from active power. [Pause] All the simple monads are separable   from one another; no, that’s not good… I am saying stupidities. The simple monads are really distinct from one another, but they have the same requisites, and these requisites are themselves inseparable. And they are not themselves separable, the monads, since each one casts the shadow over all the others. There you are (Voilà).
What remains for us is the most difficult, and then what’s going to happen? Specifically, we have a requirement; how is the requirement going to be realized? How are the requisites going to be fulfilled? I add… Ah yes, I forgot the essential point: passive primitive power or limitation, that’s it – beware of texts – or “moles”, mass in the sense of “moles”, mass that includes neither extension nor inertia — that’s a requirement of extension and of inertia –, this is what Leibniz calls primary or naked matter, stripped naked (toute nue), primary matter or naked matter. If you tell me to show that to you, I can’t show it to you; it’s a requirement. In any case, it still does not include anything of extension; it’s pure limitation. It is a requirement of extension.
Third point, still in this second criterion: how is the requirement going to be realized? — [Pause ; interruption, question from a student] Yes, just a moment so I can look that up… —  Sense immediately what our answer is going to be, but that showing this will be complicated: the only thing that can realize the requirement of extension and antitype – normally, you must wait for me at the turn, or rather wait for Leibniz at the turn — it would be for him to tell us [that] it’s extension and antitype and to show us how extension comes to realize the requirement of extension. That [answer] would be worthless (nul); it would be worthless, it would not be philosophy, impossible. I cannot establish a requirement of extension and then answer that it’s the extension that realizes the requirement of extension. This would be the worst verbalizing. And you sense what the answer must be here: one has to let oneself be guided by the necessities, otherwise we are lost! There again we have no choice because Leibniz had no choice: there can only be one answer for him. It’s the body. It’s when we have a body, and insofar as we have a body, that limitation conceived as requirement of extension and antitype is realized. The body alone can realize the requirement.
But then the body, it’s not extension? That’s not what it is? Or else it constructs it, it secretes it? Perhaps the body secretes extension? And it secretes antitype? Perhaps it does all that! It becomes possible to say, [but] I don’t know if it’s possible to prove. But the only answer is we are blocked, otherwise we’d have to stop, which would be nice: if Leibniz had stopped, we would have to stop there. We would say: he couldn’t go any farther; he was swallowed up by the sea… Yes, like Nietzsche, he stopped… He had a little accident that made him stop. Otherwise our task is painful: we must continue, we must continue, we must continue! We know at least where we await our answer; we have no choice: the body alone can fulfill the requirement. [Question from a student] Yes?
Question: [Inaudible – on the problem of evil in Leibniz]
Deleuze: This is absolutely correct. Evil… But here we have to distinguish what is Leibnizian and what is general, what’s a general theme in the period, — this doesn’t mean that it’s not good to be general — what belongs to Leibniz and what we find a little bit everywhere. What we find a little bit everywhere in the seventeenth century in philosophy is the idea that evil solely has limitation for its source. With limitation being the condition of any creature, God is responsible for Good, but is not responsible for Evil. Creatures exist only as limited; limitation is the source of evil. This is not Leibnizian, it’s general. You find it in Descartes, in Spinoza, and that comes from a deeper operation (this is not simply a theological platitude): it’s their conception according to which – it’s their anti-Aristotelianism – there are no privations, there are only limitations. This is an extremely original thesis that occupied the entire seventeenth century, the attempt to reduce privation to a simple limitation. It’s an initial point; it’s general.
 
The second point that shows you are correct is specific to Leibniz: Leibniz has an original way of conceiving of the very rapport between limitation and positivity, positive power (puissance). This is an original way; so Spinoza is another one, then Descartes another, Malebranche another, I believe. Each in the originality of his philosophy has a certain way of conceiving of the rapport between reality, which is necessarily positive, between positive reality and limitation, the limitation of this reality. Leibniz’s original way, as we saw — if we want to compare it to the others, this would be an entirely different subject, so I limit myself to this by saying [that] –Leibniz’s originality seems to me to be this: limitation is conceived by him as passive primitive power, that is, requirement of extension and resistance. That’s what is specific to Leibniz. If you prefer, I’m looking into a text that is even more precise on this, in a text from The Theodicy, which will be very important for us, but when we get to physics. And I have to find this text because… I noted it down somewhere, but it indicates well the originality of … [Pause]  Theodicy, first part, paragraph 30 – this will be good because I really would like to have some among you read it for the next meeting: “Matter itself . . . originally is inclined to slowness or privation of speed”. It doesn’t matter that this concerns physical matter, you’ll see soon. So that’s what he says, and so it is worth… I am allowing myself to develop this text now, because it is so beautiful, and as you will see, and I would like to situate it there as an answer to your question.
Leibniz adopts an example from physics in which it’s a question of the problem of metaphysics and of the metaphysical limitation of creatures. He says: for you to understand the problem of the metaphysical limitation of creatures, I have to explain to you something that concerns physics, which will help you. And here is what he says: “Let us suppose that the current of one and the same river carried along with it various boats, which differ among themselves only in the cargo, some being laden with wood, others with stone, and some more, others less.” – Notice, on the same river, at the same moment, there are some boats; we assume the river is the same for all the boats, the current is equal for all the boats; this is a working hypothesis — “That being so, it will come about that the boats most heavily laden will go more slowly than the others, provided it be assumed that the wind or the oar, or some other similar means, assist them not at all.” So they are following the current, more or less loaded down, the most burdened are going more slowly than the others. They don’t have the same primary matter, I’d say; they don’t have the same mass. So, first possibility: is it the weight that explains why the boats are going more or less quickly? Answer: “It is not, properly speaking, weight which is the cause of this retardation,” — due to the fact that certain boats are going more slowly; it’s not the weight — “since the boats are going down and not upwards; but it is the same cause which also increases the weight in bodies that have greater density,” — one must certainly not bring in weight all alone — “which are, that is to say, less porous and more charged with matter than is proper for them. . . It is therefore” — there is the essential primary text — “matter itself which originally is inclined to slowness or privation of speed, not indeed of itself to lessen this speed,” [Deleuze repeats the whole quote]. Here you can invent what follows: not to lessen it by itself, when it has already reached this speed. He tells us: matter slows down, it is inclined to slowness or privation of speed “since that would be action” (car ce serait agir). You have recognized [that] it’s pure passive power, limiting passive power; therefore, “matter itself which originally is inclined to slowness or privation of speed, not indeed of itself to lessen this speed . . . since that would be . . .” when it had already reached this speed, and it reaches it from the current. You see: all the boats reach their speed from the current, some going more slowly than others. Was this due to the weight, asks Leibniz? No, it’s not due to the weight, since they are descending rather than going upstream. It would be weight intervening if it was a question of going upstream, with oars, all that: “. . . not indeed of itself to lessen this speed . . . having once received it, since that would be action, but to moderate by its receptivity” — what a beautiful text for those truly interested in finding Kant’s premises in Leibniz’s thought — “the effect of the impression” — the impression is truly the communicated movement, the movement communicated by the current: it’s the current that creates impression — “when it is to receive it.” Do you understand, or should I re-read slowly?
I’ll try to sum this up: boats variously loaded gather movement from the same current presumed equal for all. That is, they gain speed, or if you prefer, they gather movement of a certain speed. Some go more slowly, so why? Are they going more slowly because of greater weight? No! Yet again, they descend on the current, and weight would only matter if they were following the current upstream. So why do some go more slowly? Because the more it has matter, less will be its receptivity from the quantity of movement imprinted by the current; the less its receptivity will be in very little time, the more its receptivity will take time, the more its receptivity will be slow.
In other words, what is matter? Matter is precisely receptivity. When I say that Kant isn’t far off: primary matter, primitive passive power, it’s the form of receptivity. Primitive active matter is the form of spontaneity. Here things will become luminous. Listen to this beautiful text: “The current is the cause of the boat’s movement, but not of its retardation” – incontestable; here there’s a beautiful distinction of two requisites. [Pause] “Likewise God” — you put God in the place of the current — “is the cause of perfection in the nature and the actions of the creature.” [Deleuze repeats the entire quote]  The boat’s movements = primitive active power. Yes, God is its cause… [Pause] “But the limitation of the receptivity of the creature is the cause of the defects that are there in its action.” He has dissociated on the physical level the current as cause of movements and receptivity as cause of the variation of movement, that is, from the greater to lesser speed… “Likewise God is the cause of perfection in the nature and the actions of the creature . . . [but which is] the cause of the defects that are there in its action,” that is, that a particular monad might be good and a particular other one bad, the equivalent of going fast or going slowly. It’s not God that is its cause, it’s the limitation in the receptivity of the creature. And it is varied, the primary matter, the limitation – we don’t have the same. We have more or less of a shadow. Each one has its own; each and every one has its receptivity according to its mass. Each person has its mass, its “moles”, at the level of the soul. Literally, what is receptivity? It’s the quantity of shadow in one’s soul.
And so I am ending; if you were here when we did this, that is, when we covered this point, you may recall, this reminds us… We return fully into the problem of the damned.[17] What is a damned person? It’s someone whose shadow has invaded its entire soul. So it’s someone, as [Leibniz] says in an expression that’s so beautiful that – aie, aie, aie, aie, I’ve lost it! [Deleuze looks in his texts] — In any case, insofar as [I am] soul, I have a limited receptivity. You see a limited receptivity; it’s my zone of clarity, that is, insofar as it is limited by all the shadow. I would say rather: it’s all the shadow that limits my zone of clarity because my zone of clarity refers to action. There are souls that have an extraordinarily limited receptivity, [where] everything is shadow. And the damned, you remember what happens: [Deleuze announces loudly] There Is No Soul!  Or at least you feel it: we are confronting problems that are veritable abysses because I am still speaking about reasonable souls for the moment, and I was going to say: there is no soul without its zone of clarity. Perhaps? Perhaps? But is this true for animals even if they have a soul? And we saw that for Leibniz, it’s obvious that they have souls. It’s almost the point about which he most resents Descartes; he says: Descartes, no really, someone telling you stories of animal-machines, this isn’t someone serious, even if yet again he explains that this is an explanatory mode, because afterwards, he no longer understands anything about what happens in men. He does not see that there is a depth of the soul.
The damned person is what? Do animals also have a clear zone? In my view, we can already answer Yes, necessarily. It’s perhaps not at all of the same type as for us, but they necessarily have a clear zone since they have a body. They have a body and then they clearly express what happens through their bodies, what has a rapport with their bodies. When a dog receives a blow from a stick, to return to Leibniz’s example, when it receives a solid blow from a stick, well, it clearly expresses pain; it has a clear zone of expression that has a relation to its body. But the damned person, you remember? He has so much obscurity in his soul that the only tiny light still shining is: God, I hate you! And almost fortunately he has that, it’s a tiny light, “God I hate you!” If he didn’t have that tiny light, he would literally be senile. He only has that to live for and to survive. But he will survive for all eternity because he has that tiny light. He could enlarge it, should he desire to, [and] he would cease being damned. As Leibniz says, there is no damned person who doesn’t damn himself at every moment. The damned person is not a story from the past: it would suffice for him to abandon the, God, I hate you! But this is what he insists on the most in the world, so he won’t abandon it. But even that one… So, the slowness or the limitation of one’s receptivity is infinite. We even have the impression that it no longer moves. It can no longer move. You see, we fall back completely onto this problem of metaphysical limitation, and in which God is not responsible for metaphysical limitation, but is solely responsible not for passive limiting force, but active limiting force. So that’s all that I wanted to say about this first aspect. [End of cassette ; interruption in the Web Deleuze transcript]
But again grasp hold of the problem; this is really a tough one. We’ve still made some serious progress forward. Those who, I’m saying… I was saying, why do bodies emerge? But here we are [Return to the Web Deleuze transcript] now at the start of an answer, but this will not be easy. We have the start of an answer. We were asking: why do bodies exist ? We were asking why does the fact of clearly expressing a tiny region result in me having a body? That was our problem. I must have a body since the tiny region is what will concern my body — I place this indeed in the future — once I will have it. And our answer now is that the monad had a passive primitive power, that this passive primitive power, or limitation, was the requirement for extension and resistance. What can…? For this point, we pass on to another thing: what can satisfy this requirement, fulfill this requirement? The body and only the body, having a body. At this level, the monad sighs, it truly sighs: God, give me a body, I need a body. [Pause]  So be it. [Interruption of Web Deleuze transcript] [A student asks a question]… Yes ?
First student: There is something that bothers me in the text you read. There’s a problem regarding the movement of the two objects in the same current. In a river’s current, a ship and a dead leaf go at the same speed. I’ve never seen a dead leaf overtake a ship in the same current. This might be true for [inaudible], but not for when boats are carried along in the same current.
Deleuze : So, here, [what you say] is troubling me… [Laughter] Suddenly, I’m telling myself, what’s going on… So, let’s stop and think about this.
First student: There are no distinctions to make for masses carried along by the water’s current, and in fact, experts on Galileo… [The comment is lost in the other students’ voices ; he refers to the descent of two objects and to their uniform acceleration] Large masses arrive at the same time. [Different discussions are heard, near to Deleuze, and others farther off]
Deleuze: But you, it seems to me that you are completely neglecting the current, clearly. Let’s take, for example, two… I choose a kid’s game, two matches in a stream, leaving at the same time. They race each other. You’ll tell me that one of the two matches doesn’t encounter the same milieu. Let’s assume that the current is equal for both, with one of the matches [alone] and a group of two matches connected together, and you don’t have [inaudible]. In my view, there is a particular difference from “you drop [the masses from above].” It’s well understood that… [The first student tries to interrupt] We assume that the current is the same. This is not at all the case for Galileo. It’s not at all a descent, not at all a descent. You have here what is called in physics – here, I’m… This is not meant to drown you out, it’s just that I’m trying to regroup a bit because… This is at the risk of having a good laugh, either at your expense or at mine. — But I’m saying that this story of the descent is what is called “labor” (un travail) in physics. So we can very well say labor is when an effect consumes its cause. For example, you raise up a body to a given height, and then you let it fall, so, in fact, in conditions of falling in a vacuum, well, it falls the same [as another]. In the case of my current, it’s a completely different story. In this case, you have a movement that is imprinted from one body to another. I am looking for differences in this; here there’s a current that imprints on a boat. It’s not a body that’s falling. You have movement because, otherwise, they’d remain fixed in place. If there were no current, they’d remain fixed. One cannot assimilate this to “you dropped [something from above]”.
The first student: These are bodies in the water.
Deleuze : It’s a body that receives its movement from the current, not from labor. [Objections are raised]. No, they [the boats] are place [into the water]. They don’t have the same speed, eh? They are placed [into the water]; we are assuming small boats, some models, and they are placed into the current. At first they have no speed. So they receive the movement from the current. Ok? You let me know if this is ok… If you will, this is therefore the case, how to say this, there is an expression that is slipping me; I am looking for it because Leibniz… It’s motor action (action motrice), in fact. This is the difference between labor and motor action, in my view, because… [Different answers come at once from several students, with a second one speaking quickly] I don’t understand. Here, I don’t understand.
[The second student again presents the situation of the two bodies in the water; different discussions are taking place as he speaks. This student suggests that the difference between the two bodies is nil.]
Deleuze: But, no, it’s not nil. It’s equal to zero at the very first moment; it is set at zero at the very first, but it is printed on the bodies… [Pause] You’re right. I sense that we are reaching something here. It’s equal to zero in the first instance because this is exactly what Leibniz poses as an objection to Descartes. He tells him, your law is valid for the first moment of movement. It’s true when you place the bodies in at the first moment, and there, in fact, it is zero. But, from the next moment small a, it has received movement from the current.
[The first student jumps in and returns to the example of the bodies falling in space; the student’s speed of delivery here is increasingly rapid (and excited) as he presents his examples. The second student again intervenes, speaking much more slowly, returning to the boats in the water, but with another example of immobile water in a cooking pot, and his comment raises numerous objections from other students. A woman student then intervenes, responding to the second student]
Deleuze : Here are some texts, here we have some texts. Listen up, please. There is surely a way to discover something because… — What a story! [Laughter] I have the impression that we possess two kinds of proof and that we’re not going to speak about the same one. — So, listen up: [Return to the Web Deleuze transcript] Leibniz distinguishes two cases for his laws of movement. In any case, this is his problem: how to define force or power (puissance). This is very good because it makes me move toward the physical criteria of substance. How to define force or power? He says: Descartes defined force or power by the quantity of movement, that is, by m. On this point, we must distinguish two cases. The first case is what is called since [Descartes] the case of work. The case of work is the case of a force that consumes itself in its effect. Example: you lift up – I’d like to finish today on this point, so this will allow us to make progress on the physical criterion — You lift up a body to some height, so you furnish some work, then you let everything go. [Pause] There you have Leibniz’s argument; you can find it mostly in… Yes ?
[Question from the woman student who spoke earlier, now raising a question regarding Einstein’s physics. While she is speaking, Deleuze coughs quite deeply making small groans, and then says]
Deleuze: Listen, this is not a matter of Einstein. I assure you that it’s elementary physics, because we are saying, him and me, that it’s elementary physics. [Laughter] So, if we take up the slightest scholarly argument, it’s obvious that it will be a means of escape.
So, first case, I lift a one-pound body A to four meters, a one-pound body to four meters. Then I lift up a four-pound body B to one meter. [Pause] I have to use the same force to lift them in both cases. [Pause] But – and here I have to verify this from my memory in the Discourse on Metaphysics, there is a little drawing on this example – but according to Galileo’s famous theory, the fall in the first case has twice the speed that it has in the second case, [Pause] even though the height is four times greater. What does he conclude? He draws the triumphant conclusion against Descartes, therefore, that force and quantity of movements cannot be confused. That’s the first case. In my opinion, this is the one that you are talking about, but we’ll see.
Second case: it’s no longer at all a question of a force that is consumed in labor, notably, that must be it, I think. In the first case, time does not intervene. In fact, force consumes itself, as one says, in an instant. There is no consideration of time. There is physically no consideration of time, and in fact, if you look for what is conserved in both cases, you reach the Leibnizian formula mv2 [squared], and not mv as Descartes believed, because Descartes believed and confused force and quantity of movement. [A student tries to interrupt] – You’ll let me follow this to the end? Is it ok, so far? You agree? Are you all right? … Whew, I mean, what is…
Second case, it’s entirely different. It’s no longer, how to say this… [Deleuze listens to a student beside him] a question of a force that consumes itself in work, a question of a force that consumes itself in work. It’s a question of a uniform movement of a rolling body, by virtue of an acquired speed, through a hypothesis without resistance. Here, there’s no point in saying already that the case is entirely different since one has to introduce time. In what sense must one introduce time? It’s what we will no longer call work, but motor action (action motrice). Here is the example given by Leibniz: two leagues (lieues) in two hours. A mobile body. Everything is different. Perhaps I have expressed myself poorly since the body is assumed to be a rolling body by virtue of its acquired speed. For, in fact, in the first moment of speed, as he says, it’s Descartes’s formula that is valid, such that Descartes can only comprehend the movement as it initiates. But already he cannot understand the uniform movement. So the example that [Leibniz] gives is: a body traverses two leagues in two hours. Two leagues in two hours is twice one league in one hour. [Pause; voices again start to rise] One league in one hour is twice one league in two hours [Deleuze repeats this]. [Interruption in the Web Deleuze transcript] – [I hear] objections are coming in from somewhere… Who doesn’t agree?… Eh? Why? [The voice of a woman student is heard, content inaudible]
The first case – you don’t understand me – first case: two leagues in two hours is double one league in one hour. [The woman student continues speaking] A body that makes two leagues in two realizes… so, what must we say, in fact?… [Several answers are suggested]… It’s not a labor exactly… — Where did I put my book? [Pause] I must not have taken it with me. — [Noises of movement and voices from different directions] Traverses! Yes, let’s say that: A body that covers two leagues in two hours traverses a space that is double that of one league. [Pause; the woman student continues stating her objection] No, I didn’t say that it’s normal; on the contrary, we are looking for normal… So, a body that traverses two leagues in two hours traverses a space double to those or the one that traverses one league in one hour.
Second case… [The sound of voices is still heard], a body that traverses – second case, eh? A body that traverses one league in one hour, so here I’d say, takes twice less time (met deux fois moins de temps) than the one that traverses one league in two hours. Eh?
Third: A body that traverses two leagues in two hours – we’re going back to the first one – so there, traverses a quadruple space, and not a double [space], than the one operating, traversing one league in two hours. [Pause] I will re-read this, abridging it since…[18]
Two leagues in two hours – first proposition – two leagues in two hours, double one league in one hour. [Voice of the same woman student who still voices an objection; Deleuze responds to her] Space and time… [Pause as she continues] No, we aren’t going to include speed. We will have speed intervene elsewhere since we are looking at space and time. We are going to apply the formula e=vt,  and this is going to be important since, in this case, it’s going to be the problem – ah, she’s understood all of it – it’s going to be the problem of uniform movement. This uniform movement is going to be mv multiplied by e. But e is vt so uniform movement will give you mv2t, mv multiplied by e equals mv multiplied by vt, mv2t. You rediscover mv.
What mattered to Leibniz is that there’s transformation – we’ll come back to this later; we’re not done – there’s transformation where, in all these equations, he is going to find mv2, but he cannot find it in the same way in the case of labor, [in the case] of cause that is consumed by its effect, and in the case of motor action, that is, uniform movement of a body rolling by virtue of an acquired speed since, in the second case, there will be mv2t or mvvt or mve.
So we return to… Here, you have two bodies; this is like your cooking pot example that you had. What’s going to happen? I have a track, I have a track. Here, we mustn’t exaggerate, I have a track. – Look at me because I need to follow in your mind as much as… And each of us has two little autos [? word unclear] and [A student jokes: And we throw them!] … What? [Student: We throw them!] We throw them, with a force assumed to be exactly the same. Yours is full of … iron bolts, and mine is full of… [The students start suggesting possible objects, and Deleuze doesn’t complete the sentence] The force with which we throw it is strictly the same, that is, Leibniz would say, we imprint on the two mobile objects the same quantity of words. He doesn’t already say… Not what I thought. [The woman student interrupts Deleuze once more]… What?
[Then, the first student intervenes again about the boats, suggesting that the boat example only works if it’s all located in stagnant water; if there is a motor force, if it’s the case of bodies carried in the current, that wouldn’t work. Everyone in the class starts talking.]
Deleuze: The current… No, in fact,… But the mistake… The confusion doesn’t come from what you are saying. [Deleuze is speaking very loudly in order to be heard] The confusion comes from, not what is made to intervene in the current, [but from] what causes the current to intervene as the first thrust.
The second student: There’s someone who pushes the boat…
Deleuze: And after, he doesn’t bother any more with the current, he doesn’t bother at all.
The second student: I thought that it’s the river that had the current.
Deleuze: Ah, this is an argument for another time. [The second student continues, inaudible] It’s an argument, but I don’t want to end on this point because it’s a very broad argument. You could say just as well that, until now, I had never heard about there not being any resistance in the same way. The current intervenes to imprint a movement, and then no longer intervenes, that is, the slightest mathematician can no longer take into account a factor that has played out its effect. [Different comments, indistinct] No, no, inversely, it’s me who read the text wrong, and as a result… [Deleuze does not finish the sentence]
So, anyway, in order for you to see where we are, suddenly, to create a short-cut, we took on the physical criterion of substance. What I’d like to emphasize after… For me, all this has been very useful because I was telling myself, suddenly, my God, what’s not working here, and as if I hadn’t thought about it, and I had some awful doubt; I told myself, Leibniz couldn’t have made a mistake, so… Well, then here we are.
What I want you to retain is that when he substitutes mv2 for mv, this substitution bears on a very precise problem, which is: [Pause] what is it that measures force? And his reproach against Descartes is… Because [Return to the Web Deleuze transcription] sometimes it is said that he substitutes force for quantity of movement, but this is not true. The real physical problem that Leibniz poses is not at all that Descartes ignored force; it’s that Descartes believed it possible to measure force as the quantity of movement, mv. In the end, it is entirely linked to his conception of substance. And Leibniz’s idea is that this is physically false. So remember that it’s by virtue of actual science, by virtue of modern science – this is why it’s very important – it’s by virtue of modern science that he needed to reactivate something in Aristotle. And what will that be? He is going to consider the two cases that Descartes could not distinguish, the case of work that is, if you will – Leibniz repeats it often – an ascendant movement, a vertical movement. That’s what is the case of work or the case of force that consumes itself in its effect. And the second case [is] the case of horizontal movement, that is, a supposedly uniform movement of a rolling body by virtue of its acquired speed. In the first case, force consumes itself in its effect in the instant. In the second case, there is the necessity of introducing time. [Pause]  In the first case, the formula of force is mv2, and not mv. [Pause]  In the second case, the formula of force is mv2T, motor action.
In what way is this directly linked to the idea of substance? Notice henceforth that contrary to Descartes, extension itself cannot be substance. If I say mv, that might work, I can deal with extension as a substance; mv2, something has to be added to substance, and in the text Discourse on Metaphysics, Leibniz will say clearly: something is required that is a kind of Aristotelian form, that is, that would be an active force. [Pause] And we will say: work is active force in the instant [Pause] and motor action is active force in the unit of time. [Pause]  In both cases, it’s force. By nature, it is always positive, and Leibniz attaches to it a lot of importance. Why? Because a square is always positive. That is essential for Leibniz. It’s essential: he sees in this a kind of prodigious accord, like a kind of additional proof of God’s existence, specifically the force that conserves itself in the physical world, or mv2, since v2 by nature is always positive. This force mv2 [is] distinct from the quantity of movement, and whose extension itself cannot take account of an active force. This is what engenders movement in extension. Descartes, according to Leibniz, is incapable of taking account of the genesis of movement in extension.
Hence, Leibniz’s great formula that you will find in On Nature Itself, a little text at the end of Leibniz’s life: the mechanism pretends to explain everything by movement, but it is absolutely incapable of taking account of movement itself. This will be his perpetual objection against Descartes and against the idea of an extended substance. And this force mv2 he will call derivative force. [Pause] Derivative force will be active force, you see, that engenders movement and to which a derivative passive force responds. The derivative passive force that we’ve just seen is the limitation of receptivity, the limitation of receptivity according to the law of motor action. And it’s in this sense that he can say that physical bodies symbolize with monads or metaphysical substance, with spiritual substance since: just as spiritual substance presented to us active primitive force, passive primitive force or limitation, so too bodies will present to us active derivative force and passive force of limitation defined by the delimitation of a receptivity of the body, of the receptivity of the body to movements that it receives.[19]
Good. That [discussion] created some problems for me, but at the same time, it was indispensable. So then, what I would like to say is here’s where we are. We are exactly within the problem; we have been brought back to our problem. Simply, I have nearly completed the physical criteria of substance. I’ll have very few things to add to what I’ve said today. This is where I am precisely: fine, the monad has and includes a requirement of extension and antitype, and of resistance. We feel that the only thing that can realize this requirement – to realize, and the word realize matters to me greatly; we shall see why – the only thing that can realize this requirement is “having a body.” If it is fine this way, the monad has a body. But we fall back onto the question: what does it mean “having a body”? This would be the third requisite of substance. [End of the Web Deleuze transcript] There wouldn’t only be something like a requisite of primitive active force, that is, spontaneous unity of change. [Pause] There wouldn’t only be something like a requisite of passive limitative force, of limitation. There will be a third requisite that would furnish us with the expression of what “having a body” means. That is where we are.

Lecture 18, 19 May 1987: What Does It Mean to Have a Body? 
Question from Richard Pinhas: This is a question on zoology in relation to the previous session, and I am also posing it in the context of Leibniz as well as Gilles’s problematic, which is first: is there a possible passage, as concerns anxiety (inquiétude) that Gilles discussed — the anxiety of the rabbit that is being hunted, but also anxiety in perhaps a more general sense – can this anxiety concern, must it concern other creatures, notably man? And on the other hand, if that still remains anxiety in as strong a sense as we’ve understood it, is this anxiety linked to what modern phenomenology calls worry (le souci)? How do you conceive of this articulation between anxiety and worry, of a possible connection between anxiety and worry? So, it’s a question on zoology.
Deleuze: Mmmm. [Pause] The second aspect of the question, it’s up to you to answer it. [Laughter] [Pause] Good.
Everyone can hear well, because I’ve been told that often, in the back, you were hardly able to hear me ? This seems to me to be rather important. [Laughter] So, here we are. I would first like to speak to you about practical things, and I’d like you to excuse me for speaking practically to you in this way, and I am telling you rapidly that my health is rather so-so [moyenne], my health is rather so-so, and I have to take a rest. So… But it’s really ok; so-so is already not so bad. So, I will rather quickly cease teaching courses. In any case, the fact I’m going to stop is quite perfect. I’m going to do so in the following way because, besides, I just can’t manage any more. I feel that the moment has come; I’m not managing it any more. It’s very special, teaching courses, you know, it’s very odd. There is a moment at which one feels quite clearly that the time has come given how long we’ve done [this]…. It’s not that this is the most divine activity in the world, not at all, but it’s such a special activity. So I am going to stop rather quickly, but I nonetheless am going to finish what I wanted to, that is, today I’m going to, but you will see in what form, and I am going to teach two more courses, two courses on what I had intended, that is: harmony and comparison of musical harmony in Leibniz’s era, and about what Leibniz calls harmony. So today, we are going to have a session… I am going to explain to you what I’d like us to do, and the next two sessions will be on harmony in which I will truly need the contributions of two participants here, competent in music. But I need other people as well.
Generally speaking – that I am accelerating a bit the end of classes is not serious because we have done more or less what I hoped for, in the end, the essential part of what I had wanted to say about Leibniz. I will still come to class in June, but uniquely to see students, either in the premier cycle or deuxième cycle, or about theses, those who need to see me and that usually I never have the time to see. So you will consider this from the viewpoint of our work in common, you will consider that there are only two more classes, which makes the 27th [actually, the 26th] and at the start of June. After that, I will no longer be speaking. [Pause] So there we are.
Having said this, today, I would like this to be a very calm (douce) meeting because I admit that [Pause] it seems to me that it’s a domain in Leibniz’s thought [that’s] at once so complex and mysterious and so ahead of his time, on other levels, I don’t know. So this is a domain that I summarize in this form: what does it mean for Leibniz, having a body? What is that, having a body?[2] And I am going to try to do the most, I don’t know, not like I have done in other sessions because, for me, in my reading of Leibniz on this, the questions abound frequently more than… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence] And if I don’t succeed [in understanding], I would tell you. Fine, here’s what I am not managing to understand. [Pause]
We started off from this, you recall – I am tossing out rather separate points – we started off from this, that the individual substance, the monad, which is pure spirit (you recall, we saw it in this form: it is pure spirit, it is soul or spirit), we have seen that the individual substance had two requisites: it was active unity spontaneously produced from its own predicates. Notice that this is already not easy: what might it mean, a predicate like “I am taking a walk,” whereas the subject is the monad as pure soul? It’s taking a walk, the soul; what does that mean? Someone will say: it’s that, on the other hand, there’s already a body — no! If you follow my difficulty, it’s: No, we know nothing at all about it. Why do we know nothing at all about it? We don’t know if there aren’t grounds to be Berkeleyian, as we said the last time, specifically: there are perceptions, yes, there are perceptions in the monad, and interiors in the monad, so at the outside, I could say: I perceive myself taking a walk (me promènant). What is in the monad cannot be the walk. What is in the monad is the percipit, it’s the perception of the walk.
I would like you to make an additional effort because we can sense that this is not going right. If there were no body, there would be perception, that’s agreed, but would there be perceptions of the walk? That seems strange. I take a text from [Pierre] Bayle, you know, in his “Objections to Leibniz.” In his “Objections to Leibniz,” Bayle says, in general, even not in general, he says precisely: you remember the story of the dog, the blow of the stick he receives when he eats, etc. And he says: But the monad of the dog thus perceives in a confused way the blow of the stick that’s being readied – perception of the blow of the stick – and then, grasps the pain while the blow of the stick is being readied in matter, and that the stick, as body, strikes down onto the dog’s body. But as Bayle says: at the outside, nothing requires there to be bodies, and in my opinion, the monad of the dog could very well link up the perception of the stick and the perception of the blow. God would have constituted it in this way, but there would be no bodies. That’s indeed what [George] Berkeley will tell us. [Pause]
What causes us to say: “there is a body?” These examples bother me. It’s true that from an absolutely logical viewpoint, I can say: the monad of the dog passes on from the perception of the stick; it does not pass from the stick to the blow, since it is purely spiritual, but it can pass from the perception of the stick to the perception of the blow; it passes from one perception to another. These perceptions are data, in fact, inherent to the monad. So this, I can say it, but it’s really strange: if there were no bodies, it would be rather strange for perceptions to be perceptions of a pseudo-body. It seems to me that if there were no bodies, the monad would be full of perceptions, but these perceptions would be of another nature than perceptions of ghostly strikes from a stick. [Pause] Fine.
And when Leibniz answers Bayle: why yes, why yes, this would, in the extreme, be possible; it would be possible that no stick would exist and there would be no dog’s body, that would not prevent the dog monad from having a perception of the stick and of having a perception of the blow as a form of pain. We tell ourselves: in the end, ok, fine, but all that is just a manner of speaking. What does that mean? Why must there be bodies? Having a body! At the point where we are, in fact, we have well defined “monad”, [so] why must there be bodies? I tell myself something: perhaps the requirement of having a body belongs most fundamentally to the world of the event. [Pause] One might almost say that the event has a double requirement, and if you grant me that we have spent quite a long time questioning what an event is, while considering it as a double secret of Leibniz’s philosophy, I would say: yes, there is no event that is not directed to the spirit. Perhaps events are not eternal essences, but in a certain way, perhaps events spy on us and wait for us? [Pause]
Intervention a student: Can I say something?
Deleuze: Yes.
Student: A small comment on the level of the event. Someone who seemed very qualified to talk about this was Ferdinand Braudel. Very close to the end, he said: the event is a bit like an explosion of dust, like fireworks, and after, everything settles back down into night and darkness. It’s a phrase from Braudel. I mean with this that if the event is necessarily crucial, hence the necessity of a body, a problem presents itself of the continuous and the discontinuous. Braudel presented events – and he even had, anyway, when he was speaking of the event, he knew what he was talking about – and so it was something discontinuous, that exploded like that and then after, fell back into a kind of darkness or night, hence the problem of the continuous and the discontinuous. In that time, what is the body doing? I mean, is it on vacation, is it out strolling around? It is not necessarily substance, it is not always plugged in, as some would say today, into the event in a kind of constant tension, since the event really appears like that only as a kind of explosion that surprises us, and after, we get out of it what we can, but after, once more it’s darkness, it’s night. [Pause]
Gilles: I would like to say, with very great respect, and let this be really a suggestion: don’t mix things up. You tell us: yes, Braudel says such and such. And certainly, what Braudel says is beautiful, but I am not sure that it implies the discontinuity of the event that you state. But in the end, we can talk about it. But we ourselves, we remained on the event for several weeks, for example, not from Braudel’s works, but for example, on the event from Whitehead’s works, and Whitehead told us: be careful, you recall, an event is not someone who gets run over; it is that also, but ten minutes spent in this room is an event, even if absolutely nothing happens. It’s an event. The passage of Nature, as he says, in a location is an event, it’s an event. Two minutes in the life of the Grand Pyramid is an event. So, fine, when we’ve analyzed… and this is why I feel no need to go back into Whitehead since we have done so. We have analyzed all the thickness of explication and definition that Whitehead proposed to us about the event, from the convergent series that implied, the prehensions, the prehensions of prehensions, etc…. If we began to study Braudel, I believe we would have other definition, euh, other values about the event. In my opinion, these would have some very, very important points of contact. So, I am saying, in any case, one must not take on too fully a historian speaking to us about the event in history since we are involved as well with the event everywhere, an event here; someone lighting a cigarette, it’s an event. If there is a light [for the cigarette], it’s an event, [Laughter] but there are really events that are entirely from all directions [de tous courants]. So what I mean is, once I’ve agreed that we can ponder this, well fine, does this connect to Braudel, and to what extent does that connect, for example, with what Braudel is saying?
I myself have a feeling that the event is double, that it’s a bifurcation, that any event is bifurcated. Why? First, because any event precedes itself, just as it succeeds itself; that’s why I said: don’t judge everything too quickly; about one continuity and one discontinuity, we know that an event indeed risks preceding itself and following itself. [End of the cassette; interruption of the BNF recording; text from Web Deleuze] But insofar as it precedes itself and follows itself, this is… Leibniz: the perception of the stick precedes the blow, but the perception of the stick, the evil man sneaking up behind the dog, this was already an event. [Return to the BNF recording] Every event precedes itself, every event follows itself. [Pause] In a certain manner, one might say: every event waits for me! And it’s already that. What interests me is a morality (une morale) of the event, because I believe that there is no other morality than that of the nature of people in relation to what occurs to them.[3] Morality is never: what must one do? [Rather] it’s: how can you stand what happens to you, whether this be good or bad?
One of the greatest moralists of the event is the poet Joë Bousquet. Bousquet suffered a ghastly wound that paralyzed him, and among other things, everything that he tried to say and explain was in some manner: this event, I was created to incarnate it. That is, starting from this, his problem was, in a certain manner, being worthy of the event. You certainly sense that there are people who are unworthy of the event as much in happiness as in misfortune. Being worthy of the event, however tiny it might be, this is why this is a very concrete morality; this doesn’t mean being serious (grave), certainly not, it’s not about that, but there are people who create our suffering, [and] why? Because, in some ways, they render everything mediocre, both the good that happens to them and the bad. You indeed sense that there is a certain way to live the event as being worthy (en étant digne) of what happens to us in the good and the bad. I would say that it’s this aspect through which every event is addressed to my soul. What makes those who whine (les gémissants) so difficult to be around? They are not worthy of what happens to them. You will tell me: what happens to them… unless I am already saying too much by saying that whiners aren’t worthy of what happens to them, for there are whiners of genius. — I would almost like this to be this way all the time; I can’t suggest a sentence without having to withdraw it — There are whiners/wailers who are worthy of what happens, it’s even these ones that are called prophets, the prophet in his fundamental wailing. There are some who take wailing to a level of poetry, elegy, and elegy means the complaint … There are some that complain with such nobility; think of Job. Job’s complaint is worthy of the event.[4] Fine, I cannot even speak. Each time I have to withdraw it, but you can correct [it] by yourself. I am simply saying: every event addresses itself to the soul or the spirit. So, I understand a bit better; there are events that address themselves particularly to the soul. At the extreme, I would say: ok, I understand suddenly a little something, that we might be able to tell ourselves that taking a walk is an event of the spirit, and that we might be able to count “I’m taking a walk” among the predicates of the monad, yes. At least, this gets us a bit farther forward there.
If I try to create some terminology, I would say, at least this explains to me a few words that Leibniz uses constantly: virtual, actual, the virtual, the actual. We’ve seen this. We’ve seen that he uses [the terms] in rather different senses.[5] [Pause] First sense: each monad, you and me, each individual substance, is called “actual”. It expresses the totality of the world, but this world, you recall, does not exist outside the monads that express it. In other words, this world that exists only in the monads that express it is in itself “virtual”. The world is the infinite series of states of events, [so] I can say: the event, as virtuality, refers back to individual substances that express it. It’s the virtual-actual rapport. What does this rapport imply? When we tried to define it, we arrived at the idea of a kind of tension: at once, all monads are for the world, but the world is in each monad, which gave us a sort of tension. And very often, Leibniz uses the terms virtual, actual. I am simply saying: in whatever sense that this might be, he will tell us, for example, that all innate ideas, all true ideas, are virtual ideas, that they are virtual; he will use “virtual” in other cases, but in my opinion, always in rapport with the actual, and to designate the rapport of a type of event with the soul.
And nothing, nothing can remove from us the idea that this is not yet adequate, and that, however profound the event might be, to the extent that it expresses itself in the soul, something will always be missing if it also isn’t realized in the body, and that it has to go all the way there. It has to be inscribed in a flesh (une chair), it has to be realized in a body, it has to mark itself in a matter (une matière). This time, would it be something else? If I looked for a couple, the event not only has to actualize itself in a soul, it must also be realized in a matter, in a body. I would say: here, this is no longer exactly virtual-actual, [but] possible-real. It’s possible-real. [Pause] The event would eternally remain a pure possible if it didn’t actualize itself in a body. It would remain a pure virtual if it didn’t actualize itself, if it didn’t express itself in a soul. It would remain a pure possible if it didn’t pass into a body. Why do I say that? Well, because for Leibniz, the two couples do function: possible-real, virtual-actual. And this is quite dangerous, it seems to me, since many commentators make no different between these two axes. [Pause] There is a fundamental difference.
In the letters to the reverend Des Bosses about whom I’ve already spoken to you, in letters to the reverend Des Bosses – yes, it’s Des [Bosses],[6] appearing at the very end of Leibniz’s life, a whole series of very odd expressions appear. The letters are written in Latin. Appearing on about every third page, so with a great frequency, the term “realisere” appears, or as a participle “realisans”, [Pause] and [Leibniz] asks: what is capable of realizing phenomena, [Pause] or what is the realizing thing (réalisant)?[7] I quote: “Monads will influence this realizing thing, but it will change nothing in their laws.”[8] It matters little who the realizing thing is; what matters is that it not be confused with the monads. [Pause] [34 :00] Another text: “I hardly see how one could explain the things starting from monads and phenomena; one must add something that realizes them” — something that realizes the phenomena and monads, one must add something that realizes them. What do I find of interest here, understand? What is real? What’s real is not matter, otherwise it would be matter that would be the realizing thing; it is obviously not matter, it’s not the body, it’s not the body either. Moreover, matter, the body, it’s what will be realized by the realizing thing. [Pause] As we will see or will try to see, the realizing thing has a close rapport not with the body in general, but with the living body, with the living. One not only must — and this seems to me a very profound idea in a philosophy of the event like Leibniz’s, and all of his morality is engaged in this as well. It so happens not only that the event is actualized in the monad, it must be realized in the lived body (corps vécu), and in this sense, there must be a realizing thing just as there must be an actualizing thing (un actualisant). The actualizing thing is the monad itself. We need a realizing thing that realizes the event in matter, or that realizes the event in the body, precisely as there is – not precisely as, but as there is [Pause] an actualizing thing that… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
As a result, I come back, as someone asked me at the last meeting, I come back completely to a departure point when I said, you see the Baroque is not really, [Pause] shouldn’t be so difficult to define. And as I was telling you, the Baroque is a house with two floors, and there must be two floors. And one of the two floors connects to pleats (replis) of matter, while the upper floor connects to folds in the soul.[9] There are folds in the soul just as there are pleats of matter. No doubt it’s a kind of strange circuit from one stage to another that is going to constitute the Baroque world. You sense now that we grasp a reason, at least at the level of Leibniz, we grasp a Leibnizian reason concerning these two floors. The Leibnizian reason is the event. The event implies these two floors. It must actualize itself in the monad, yes, but it must also inscribe itself in a lived body. [Pause] When the event actualizes itself in the monad, it makes folds in the soul, [Pause] but it must live it. It’s the soul there, it’s your soul that folds itself. And when the event inscribes itself in the lived body, it makes pleats, it makes pleats in matter, in living matter.
What’s happening? I would like you to feel, yes, we are moving forward a little in the reasoning: why does the monad need the body so much? Why isn’t Leibniz Berkeleyian? Why can’t we be happy with the famous: Esse est percepi, that is: everything that is in the monad, in the end, will be perceived by the monad, and that’s it, full stop? I believe that the deepest reason is precisely contained in the event, [Pause] that the event cannot be inscribed in the soul, without simultaneously demanding a body [Pause] in which it is traced. [Pause]
And then, at this point, I stumble onto a text that I was no longer thinking about. I was thinking about all that, and I told myself that it reminded me of something. One works that way a lot, as if I had already read that. I recalled a very odd book by Husserl, a book called Cartesian Meditations. This book had as its departure point Husserl’s coming to France, before the war, and he presented a certain number of talks in German, but in France, that have been taken, that have been translated under the title Méditations cartésiennes, a title that pays homage to France. Husserl invokes Descartes very strangely at the beginning, but the more he moves forward, the more he invokes not Leibniz, but monads. It’s such a strange term from Husserl’s pen, and one wonders what is happening. [Pause]
And it’s especially the fifth meditation, so in the final [part], the fifth meditation in which Husserl is going… But I am telling this to you a bit, quite imprecisely, so go look at it yourself. For once, the text really isn’t that difficult. For once, it’s not terribly difficult Husserl. Husserl tells us, without even referring to Leibniz, let’s call monad the ego, to say the moi, with its appurtenances.[10] The notion of appurtenance, we see what he means. For example, “I perceive the table,” is an appurtenance of the ego, that’s fine. I am used to perceiving the table; it’s an appurtenance of the ego. We see what he means. But this is already rather interesting — I speak for those who know a minimum, but most among you know a minimum of phenomenology, the intentionalities. The consciousnesses of something are the appurtenances of the ego. [Pause] And in a very odd text, Husserl goes so far that he says: these are immanent transcendences. The intentionalities are transcendences, transcendences of consciousness toward things, but these are immanent transcendences since these intentionalities are immanent to the monad. The monad is the ego grasped with all its appurtenances. And all intentionalities are appurtenances. You see!
And there you have Husserl asking a very strange question: how do we pass from immanent transcendence to objective transcendence? [Pause] That is, is there a way for the monad, as it were, to get out of itself? You recall the fate of the monad? We are fully within something of such great importance for Leibniz: without doors or windows. There is no way for it to get out by itself. At first glance, there’s just no way. How could one get out of oneself if there are neither doors nor windows? [Pause]  And here we have Husserl who relates a story and says: it’s odd because the ego in its appurtenance, that is, the monad, grasps among its appurtenances one very special appurtenance. It’s something that it identifies as the other, [Pause] that is, it identifies it as a lived body, the lived body of the other. [Pause] That’s a very odd intentionality, a special intentionality, why? Because it’s an empty intentionality. I’ve got a lot of empty intentionalities: for example, I look at that whatsit, that apparatus, but I have empty intentionalities; it’s the side that I don’t see. Only it’s an empty intentionality, but were I to make a little effort, if that interested me, it would fulfill itself. So that’s fine. Whereas when, [Pause] in my appurtenances, I run into one of you, and it’s an empty intentionality; in what sense? In this sense, [that] whatever I do, I would not be in your place and you will be yourself. I discover something in the appurtenances of my monad, a lived body, which can only connect with another monad. You see? And perhaps it’s that, if you recall Being and Nothingness, you remember a really beautiful page by Sartre in which we do see that Sartre was inspired completely by Husserl and by this very text by Husserl, while still making it seem, and not only making it seem, but in reproducing it. This is when Sartre imagines himself or sees himself in a public garden, he’s looking at flowers, and there he sees someone who is looking at them at the same time. And he explains, in a very beautiful page, that it was as if it was his entire world that was leaking, and since he loves miserablist metaphors, this was a world leaking through a sewer hole. You see? He was centered on his world, all that, and then he sees his neighbor looking at the same thing. It’s as if his whole world was drained, was drained into the other’s direction. He is no longer the center of his world.
What do I find of interest in that? In both cases, the living body [Pause] is really like the kind of line that creates passage from one domain to the other. [Pause]  Could we say that the father of all this is Leibniz? Alas, no! Alas, no! But I am not sure that it’s not he who is right. For you to have in hand all the elements of the problem, what I believe is that, on the contrary, Leibniz would tell us something like: very well, yes, in the monad’s appurtenances, there is still something that is odd, it’s that never ever can one get out. — Here I must have the texts as well as a lot of time; I’m just giving an indication. — I believe one would find texts not going all the way to saying — I am not forcing him to say this – but [texts] circling around the following idea: there would only be monads if there were no animals, if there were no living beings. It’s vitalism that removes him from spiritualism. [Pause] I return to Richard [Pinhas’s] question,[11] this why I was telling you that, in my opinion, he [Leibniz] is the inventor of animal psychology: he needs animals. And he explicitly says it often. He says explicitly: those who believe that there are only monads and what is inherent to monads, and what is included in monads, can only believe in human souls. It’s finally the animals (bêtes) that force us to some extent to agree that there are bodies. [Pause] He would not say, as Husserl did, he would not say that this is the existence of the other (l’existence d’autrui), for a simple reason, as we will see. It’s that in closed monads, there is no encounter with the other (autrui). We have to explain the encounter with the other (autrui). Already it can only occur outside monads. He [Leibniz] cannot suggest it. Besides I am not even sure that, in Cartesian Meditations, Husserl could suggest the encounter with… He doesn’t say the encounter with the other (autrui), but the encounter with the lived body of the other (autrui).  It seems to me that this exceeds the power of perceptions contained in monads. So, he cannot suggest it, or at least, a genesis would be necessary. As he says in the text, it’s very beautiful, for those that this might interest, this text, as he speaks about a genesis, he indeed says: it’s a question of creating a genesis, in this fifth meditation. I believe that he does not yet have enough data to create a genesis of the lived body.
 
But see why I am lingering over this. I would like to have you sense something: it’s that the entire morality of the event has these two coordinates: on one hand, be worthy of what happens to you, and on the other hand, learn to inscribe it into your flesh. [Pause] One must not, one must not… [Pause] It is even necessary sometimes, it’s necessary that everything acts. What are civilizations? Each civilization offers us manners of inscribing into the flesh; each civilization offers us manners of being worthy or not. So it’s very complicated. Take a case that fascinates me: the jester. The jester is a fundamental personage. There have been lots of studies of the jester; very interesting, the jester. At first glance, take the Russian jester, or else the English jester. I mean that you can look from Shakespeare to Dostoyevsky, and I have forgotten some. At first glance, the jester is someone who, when something happens to him, is unworthy, and deliberately is unworthy [of the event], and then avoids inscribing it into his flesh; it flees in all directions. And then, in a more complex manner, we always learn that it was the jester who was the only one to inscribe in his flesh and to be worthy of what happened. There are all sorts of stories about this.
 
But finally, I am saying, we could… [Deleuze goes to the board] We do it like this. See, we could draw a line that would begin by being straight, horizontal, and then we would have it bifurcate into two, like this, like a little branch, you see? We would put “event” on the straight line. Then, on the upper bifurcation, we would put “virtual”. Fine, I’d be happy to do it, but is this clear? We’d put “virtual”.  On the lower bifurcation, what would we put? We would put “possible”, and then we would place there a huge bubble with “actual” written on it; this would be the monad.[12] The monad includes the virtual world, it actualizes it; it is actual. So, on the other hand, we would put “possible”, and we would not place a bubble there, and we will see what we would have to put… We would place some gadget, [Laughter] and this time, it would be: “real,” with a mistake we must not make: the one that would seem to say that it’s matter that’s real. No, it’s not matter that’s real, but matter acquires the reality that it can, or that corresponds to it, when a realizing thing, about which we know ahead of time that it concerns the lived body, [Pause] incarnates within matter. Matter takes some reality when it incarnates the event. So, I cannot say it better. Good, this is fine. [Pause]  You see?
I have the feeling that, in Leibniz, these aspects are why there are two floors; this is why there are two floors. The two floors is the circuit of the event, and yet you sense in advance that there will never be the least direct rapport between soul and body. The two floors will always remain separate. I say simply: the realizing thing will perhaps be that which causes passage from one to the other, that which makes the aspect of the event pass from one to the other. The realizing thing, once again, is a notion that only appears entirely at the end of Leibniz’s works, in his final years. Before, he is satisfied with invoking, how to say this, a correspondence between the two floors, the upper floor and the lower floor. Entirely at the very end, he arrives at something very profound: it is not enough for the event to actualize itself in the monads; it must realize itself in the body. That [insight] was not yet in his earlier philosophy. There is a correspondence between the two, and what realizes in the body is a realizing thing that will explain the rapport of the monad and the lived body. [Pause]
So, as a result, at the very end entirely, we would have three aspects from Leibniz: the soul and the folds in the soul; the folds in the soul are the events that are expressed in the soul, the soul and the folds in the soul. Matter and the pleats in matter, [Pause] this in which the event realizes itself. And between the two, assuring the realization, [is] the realizing thing that can no longer be either monad, or lived body, but that can only be one thing: that which brings the lived body to the monad. It will be the rapport of the folds in the soul with the pleats of matter, and that corresponds to the Latin name: le vinculum subtantialae. The vinculum, what is it? It’s the chain, it’s the knot, it’s the chain. What is this chain? Is a chain necessary there so that the two kinds of folds correspond to each other? Why [offer] this chain at the last moment? Is it this that will decide on textures of matter, but also qualities of the soul? We are going to be thrown into an entire philosophy that will therefore confirm for us that not only are there folds in the soul, pleats of matter, but [that] a vinculum has to be made to intervene, one that, if it were possible, would sew them to each other. It doesn’t sew them to each other, in fact, but it sews a lived body in a special way, a living body that is the body of the monad. All this we have to look at more closely.[13]
But I am saying, this is not for you to understand because if I addressed myself to your understanding, I believe that this would be very obscure; it’s so that you feel something. Here I believe that Leibniz makes us feel something and that I really had to try as well to make you feel: it’s a conception of the event. It’s as if I told you, well fine, what do you want an event to be other than something that makes us stand up straight, or else that makes us lie down, something that calls out to a [kind of] dignity, and that has nothing to do with “let us be worthy because of others, someone watching me.” And also it’s something that creates a wound (fait une plaie) – but a wound, I am wrong in saying wound, that’s even grotesque — or [something] that scratches. There are caresses (chatouillements) of events, and that’s perhaps the best ones. There’s all that: that it concerns your body in that form! Or that it concerns your soul in that form!
And this is very difficult. I mean, everything always has its little brother as an abominable misunderstanding (contresens). “Be worthy of the event”, well, that can be an odious sentence. It’s precisely because we have to agree on the word “worthy” (digne). I imagine that someone might have just suffered an important loss, not a loss of money, but a very important human loss. You tap him on the back and tell him: “Be worthy of the event.” I hope that he would haul back and smack me a few times. What does dignity mean? Here, I cannot say more about it; it’s for each of you to [answer] if you pose the problem like that. One also has to scratch at one’s body. Scratch at oneself, what does that means? One has to be a louse (un pouilleux) of the event. [Laughter] And how does one scratch at oneself? There are hideous manners of scratching at oneself: “Oh, I’m the most unfortunate.” And every morning, I offer myself some scratching, “to me, the most unfortunate!” And then, in fact, there are hideous ways of scratching oneself. This is something else entirely. I am not the most unfortunate. But, finally, there’s no sure formula (pas de recette) for this. So, I am telling you, fine, this is a point. There are no… [Deleuze doesn’t finish]
Any reactions, any…? It’s not that I am demanding any at all. No reactions? You sense where I am going with this! Having a lived body, having a living body, fine. Being a monad, having a living body: there you see that being a monad is no more than half of ourselves: we must have a living body! [Pause] Yes? [End of the cassette; interruption of the BNF recording, text from Web Deleuze]
Question (from Georges Comtesse): I remember in a text by Leibniz that he was talking about what you were suggesting, the vinculum. He takes the example of hearing (l’audition), starting from a sound source, hearing an echo. [Return to the BNF recording]
Deleuze: This is very odd because, in my opinion, there are two texts. The vinculum is a term coming very late in Leibniz’s work. So, you only find it in texts entirely at the end, and notably, in my view, I am not even sure that it exists elsewhere than in the correspondence with Des Bosses. That’s one point. But, a second point, there are in the Letters to Arnauld, much earlier; there is, in the Letters to Arnauld, an extraordinary text in which he imagines the conditions of an orchestra in which all the different parts would not be visible and where – he doesn’t use the word vinculum since he doesn’t know it, or finally, he is not using it for his own purposes – he already uses the word echo. In this, your recall is perfectly correct. But there, to my knowledge, we owe it in great measure — because the text is in the correspondence to Des Bosses when he says that the vinculum is an echo, it’s from texts of very, very great difficulty — and to my knowledge, it’s [Yvon] Belaval who was able to provide commentary in such a way that we experience no difficulty, and you very aptly retained it; what you are saying is very faithful to Leibniz, but it corresponds to the interpretation.[14]
It’s even obvious what you are saying. Let’s suppose — I am simplifying enormously — there are four sound sources. Assimilate them into monads. Fine. There are four. Assign four notes; the notes are perceptions that you can assimilate to the monads. What is an echo? That’s what is wonderful in an echo, that it is second; it assumes there are sound sources. Only what is the miracle of an echo? As Comtesse said, he [Leibniz] implies, let us assume, for example, a wall. What effect does the wall have? It is going constitute the unity of the four sources by echo; they had no unity. You will tell me: they might have unity if it was four notes taken out of a particular piece of music; it was four notes. The miracle of the echo, as Leibniz tells us, is to introduce a secondary unity. But this secondary unity is going to be essential since it’s through it that he is going to explain the vinculum, which is going to explain this kind of stitching (couture) of the living body. The stitching of the living body will be an echo. And you see why he will need that: what creates the unity of the lived body, of the living body? There suddenly, he forces me to go faster, but the faster one goes, the better it will be. [Pause]
What can create the unity of the living body? Monads are spirits, they are without doors or windows, they are one by one. There are no monads of monads, you see? [Pause] There indeed has to be something equivalent to the wall in order that from a plurality, from a multiplicity of monads results a unity, a secondary unity: the unity of the lived body will be that of the vinculum, that is, of the wall. You will ask me, where does the wall come from? What is this wall? We will see. It’s a secondary unity; it’s a unity of stitching, and that’s what is going to be constitutive of the lived body. Otherwise, for the lived body, there would be no unity; there would be neither lived nor living body. Comtesse’s intervention is all the better as it allows those who wish it to create the unity with this kind of grouping of problems: Leibniz, Husserl, and even Sartre, once it’s been said that Leibniz, euh, Husserl explicitly refers to it; it would be somewhat arbitrary if there weren’t this explicit evocation in the fifth Meditation. [Pause] Yes, is this ok?
So then, we tell ourselves, a genesis is necessary, yes indeed. You see the problem: a genesis is necessary. In the end, this is what I insist on – what a shame we aren’t ending with this because I wasn’t insisting on anything else – these are the two aspects of the event. [Pause] There would be practical examinations (épreuves pratiques): lessons on a topic, written questions: Does the virtual, real exist? [Pause] Second question: is it possible there is the actual? (est-ce qu’il y a de l’actuel possible ?)
It’s very embarrassing. Look, if you read the commentators on Leibniz, possible, virtual, actual, real, are used by them in any old way, I believe, well not by all of them. It’s really annoying if they use [these terms] any old way. In the end, you have your two very different lines. It’s as if we were confusing the two floors. [Pause] Some possible realizes itself, but it’s always, when some possible realizes itself in Leibniz, look at the context. Obviously, you will always find examples that don’t go in this direction, but that doesn’t matter. When some possible realizes itself, it’s always in some world of matter, some body. [Pause] When some virtual actualizes itself, it’s always in a soul. [Pause] So now we grasp fully the two floors, and we’d say that a weaving is needed between the two, a knot, a vinculum, so that what? It’s your choice! So that the lower floor might exist, so that the existing lower floor might have any rapport whatsoever with the upper floor. In the end, there will be lots of answers.
In a sense, that would give us an ending. I was telling you, at the start of the year, I was telling you: yes, you know, the Baroque, we are going act as if we grasped a definition, and then we will see quite well where that leads us. And I was telling you that the Baroque is not making folds because we always make folds, everyone has always been making them. It’s that [in the Baroque] folds might extend to infinity. And on this [point], what is fine, otherwise nothing matters, [is] I was, I was a bit, how to say this, one can’t just do any old thing when one is too completely sure of oneself. I wasn’t sure that this would work all the way to the end. And then, really, several days ago I stumbled on some catalogues of El Greco: it’s frightening, it’s frightening, it’s frightening. It’s frightening not only due to its beauty, but what does this beauty of El Greco mean? Of course, everything is not of the same value; of course, all the paintings do not have that same kind of expression (formule). He created – fine, I cannot place it – he created seven or eight “Christ in the Garden of Olives”. There is one in England, in London that is so strange because, and I cite this because it’s the proof of our hypothesis, everything in it is folds, there are only folds, that’s all there is! And the folds are distributed over three registers: [Pause] folds of fabric, and it’s not in the sense in which every fabric then makes folds! If you look at a reproduction of this painting, so it’s Christ’s tunic in which the folds are so developed, pleats reconnecting into each other. It’s a fantastic study of folds. Folds of boulders; the boulder is in painting perhaps what is folded as much as cloth. The boulder-folding! And to this he adds a treatment of clouds that is a veritable fold, cloud-folding. There is voluntarily a manner of treating the clouds, just as he treated the boulders in a certain form, and in the entire painting, there is a circulation of three sorts of fold that truly connects to infinity.[15]
Now that we are reaching the end, I would say to you: well yeah, what are we doing? It’s this story of the folds of the soul. Once again, the folds in the soul, that comes from the event being included in the monad. [Pause] And then there are the pleats of matter. And between the two, what is there? There is this stitching, this vinculum substantialae that arises there, just before [Leibniz’s] death, and that is going then to confer — suddenly I ask myself if I would stop as quickly as I was thinking… it matters little — which is going to confer textures on matter, for we will have to consider – us, I mean; there are people who have already done so — the textures of matter. Leibniz uses the word “textura”, also at the end of his life. He must have had so many ideas. There are these textures of matter, which normally ought to belong to a Physics of matter, and to an Aesthetics of matter after all. An Aesthetics of textures, there is no more difficult a notion, in my opinion, it’s so much more beautiful – it’s not in order to attack the notion of “structure,” but I tell myself that anyway, it’s been quite a few years that we’ve been talking frequently about structure. It’s not that there was anything too wrong with that, we did … quite well. But what if we gave ourselves a bit of a break in order to go towards some other notions that have remained… “Texture” is an extremely difficult notion to analyze. I am speaking for you; at your age, or in your research projects, I would say that if it happened to some among you: look also at the richness of the material regarding textures. I mean, there is “industrial material”, very good for the moment; be competitive, but one of the least studied materials, and perhaps the most important, is painting. The great painters of textures are not at all unknowns (pas n’importe qui), and one would find that these are kinds of modern Baroques. I don’t know myself, one has to see if, among the great Baroque painters, there is already what might be recognized as radical textures. – [Deleuze speaks directly to one of the students] This was for you, if you can take on a bit more than you already have, since you have already begun to … — I see three great modern painters of textures; it’s up to you to go see [for yourself], and I am certainly forgetting some: [Jean] Fautrier; [Jean] Dubuffet who rightfully recognized his debt to Fautrier since Dubuffet constantly uses the word structure; and Paul Klee. It’s nonetheless not by chance that they have something in common and that they are not completely unknown to one another.
I was saying that [Deleuze coughs forcefully] because we find ourselves facing… In the end, what brings the folds of the soul into the pleats of matter and the pleats of matter into the folds of the soul? At the same time, that bothers me because we had wagered that all of this might hold together without stitching. [Laughter] And there we are perhaps needing some stitching, the stitching passing through the living body, without which the inorganic body would not be a real body, would purely be an imaginary body, and without which the monad, closed in on itself, etc., could not connect with anything else. [Pause] A break, ok? Five minute break? But I beg you not to come back after fifteen minutes. [Break in class and in the recording, then return]
Deleuze: Yes ?
Question from a student: On Christ. Is Christ a monad who says: I am incarnate, me, am I incarnate? Does this in a certain manner realize the incarnation of a monad? Would Christianity or Christ himself be a specific event?
Gilles: That’s not difficult; I will answer quickly because the more a question is “fundamental”, the more one must answer quickly. [Laughter] Above all, one must not say, but that’s not important because it wasn’t what you had in mind, but it was in the way you formed what you said; above all, one must not identify monad with event. The event is what happens and what occurs. The monad is what contains what happens and what occurs. The event is crossing the Rubicon, the monad is Caesar. And it’s, above all, on the one hand, the monad-event distinction that we always need to make. Second point: the monad is never incarnate. There is no incarnation of the monad for one simple reason: the monad suffices fully and entirely to itself without doors or windows. When we say, to move quickly, that the monad has a body, this means that in the domain of bodies, something carries over into a particular monad. So if Christ is incarnate, he is incarnate exactly as all monads are incarnate. This is even no doubt the model of incarnation. Does Christ pose particular problems? Yes! But strangely not at the level of incarnation, in Leibniz. He posed some very particular problems on the level of transubstantiation. And transubstantiation is not incarnation; it’s trans-carnation where the body and blood of Christ become bread and wine. You see? So he poses a special problem in the sense of passage from one body to another, the passage from Christ’s body to the bread body.
Having said this, personally Leibniz is Protestant and does not believe in the transubstantiation, but he agrees to give some help to reverend Des Bosses who is greatly concerned about this topic, and he [Leibniz] tells Des Bosses – it’s at a rather lively moment in the correspondence with reverend Des Bosses – if I were you (this is not my problem, not my business), but if I were you, I would say something like this, something like that, and he give one of Leibniz’s strangest interpretations of transubstantiation that ought to delight everyone, and that must have been useful no doubt to certain Catholics because reverend Des Bosses seems rather quite happy. In any case, as concerns Christ and incarnation, to my knowledge, he has no special position except that that he is certainly the archetype or model of incarnation.
So, I am saying let’s start over on our genesis. But you remember that I had already demanded this the last time: above all, don’t get it backwards, although one is constantly tempted to get it backwards. You recall this genesis that consists of: starting form the monad, the monad contains everything, it expresses the entire world. It expresses the entire universe. Only careful: it has a small, privileged region that it expresses specially or clearly. We saw this. Here, I’d say, is the first proposition. Second proposition: so I have a body. That’s what we have to understand. So I have a body. [Pause] In fact, this could not be otherwise. It might be more convenient perhaps to say: I have a body, so I express a privileged region! The only thing that is certain is that the privileged region, my little subdivision that I express clearly, once it’s said that I express the entire world, but I express it obscurely and in a confused way.
Sense already everything that we won’t have time to do. You foresee that there are all kinds of monads in Leibniz, that there are some very different statuses of monads. For example, a butterfly does not connect to a monad like you or me. There is a whole hierarchy of monads. There is a grand hierarchy of monads. So one has to wonder: are there monads that express nothing clearly, that don’t have a special region? In this, the texts are very difficult, [and] one would have to undertake some very precise research.  Leibniz varies according to the occasions. According to the occasions, he suggests that certain monads remain in complete darkness. There are others that, for a certain period of time, express a tiny clear region. In my opinion, animals have a monad that expresses necessarily a tiny clear region. For example, a cow expresses clearly its field. [Pause] Only, from the fact that it expresses its field clearly, it expresses closer and closer the surrounding world, the entire universe. Even a cow has a clear zone of expression, and if we transport it to another field, it changes its clear expression. So this is already not that easy. But, so even for animals.
And in other texts, Leibniz seems to tell us that it’s only reasonable souls that have a clear zone of expression. This isn’t possible. [Pause] This would raise for us some… But I am saying, your clear zone of expression is what concerns your body, and with this, we don’t have the time. There are numerous texts, in the Letters to Arnauld notably. I cite page 215, in the excerpts selected by Madame Prenant: “I had said that the soul, naturally expressing the entire universe in a certain sense, and according to the rapport that the other bodies have with one’s own” — and according to the relation that other bodies have to one’s own. That’s what defines my clear region: everything that affects my body, in fact. And in a certain way, that indeed must pass through my body. And you see, I cannot say, first of all, I express clearly what passes though my body, and second of all, the monad. Why? Because what is first is the monad without doors or windows. Why does it have a clear region of expression? Because it has a certain number of singularities around which it is constituted. Consequently, I am saying [Interruption of the Web Deleuze text; transcript follows the BNF recording] everything that it expresses clearly concerns my body and affects my body and passes through my body.
Only, that’s not easy. They have to state immediately their objection: but my body, I don’t know it at all. If I treat it like perception in the monad, well, this is a singularly confused perception. You remember? I express the universe in a confused way; let’s accept this. If there is my body in the universe, I express my body, agreed, but I express it in a confused way, in a dim way (obscurément). The movements of my lymph: this is what Arnauld objects. Arnauld objects, well, you grasp the movements of your lymph, And the movements of your blood, you grasp them very, very dimly. How can you say that you express clearly? Look, this first, euh… You express everything, agreed, but you express everything in the dark. This is the dark depth of the monad. We have seen it. You express everything in confusion. So you express your heartbeats, your arteries, the movement of your blood, all that. You can always say that you express it, but you express it in a very, very confused way, and then you are going to tell us, on the other hand, that you express yourself clearly when you say, “Ah, there, this is green grass,” that even a bull or a cow have done? They say, there it is, it’s green grass, and there it [the cow] has finally expressed something clearly. And it’s because it doesn’t pass through its body, how do we deal with that? And I believe this to be one of the most astonishing things from Des Bosses-Leibniz.
And a second problem – that was a first problem – a second problem is: in what way isn’t having a body [Pause] simply a perception? In what way is the body an object of perception? What makes me not say “I perceive my body” as I perceive green, predicate of the monad? But I say moreover, I say that I have a body, [Pause] and not the monad, but me, I am composed [Pause] of a monad and a lived body. What allows me to affirm the body as object of perception? And on these two points, on these two problems, I must say that Leibniz’s answers are astonishing. I would just like to give them to you so that you might reflect on them.
First answer: what explains that the body, that I only grasp confusedly, that my body can be said at the same time to be the condition through which [Pause] is transmitted to me (se rapporte à moi), through which passes everything that is transmitted to me, everything that I express clearly, the small portion that I express clearly. I am trying to relate this to you because… You will find in Leibniz all kinds of texts saying, generally, this: there are tiny unconscious perceptions, and with these tiny unconscious perceptions, we create a conscious perception. [Pause] Moreover, that’s what the meaning of the organs is. And some examples that he willingly gives are: you don’t hear the sound of a drop of water if it’s far away, you don’t even hear the sound of a far-off wave, and then little by little the wave [comes] closer, the wave is like that, it tells a tale like everyone; the wave is close, until it becomes a conscious perception: the sound of the sea. Or again he says: you don’t hear what each person is saying in the crowd, but you hear the brouhaha. [Pause] There are lots of texts by Leibniz going in this direction. And we’d like to interpret them in the sense of part-whole.[16] Oh well yes, it’s very simple: one doesn’t perceive the parts, but one perceives the whole.
Or else that reminds us of something in psychophysics. And a psychologist, at the time of my baccalauréat [roughly, high school finals] was extremely annoying, named [Gustav] Fechner. He was trying to establish a rapport between the increase of excitation and the emergence of sensation. It’s that the bachot (baccalauréat) is always a terrible thing, since Fechner is a nineteenth-century philosopher who is quite remarkable. And he has as a remarkable trait to be Leibnizian, so this is why it’s less astounding that he’d be the author of psychophysics.  Moreover, far from being a positivist scholar, as we are made to believe in psychophysics — it’s not a compliment — I would say that he’s a kind of grandiose madman (fou grandiose), a very great German Romantic. So it’s rather strange that a great Romantic attracted to German Romanticisms, or perhaps to post-Romanticism, it’s very strange that he created this discipline, but in the end, this matters little.[17]
If you look at the texts, I have the impression that we are going to realize something much more curious, in the end, than that. [Pause] Try to understand, it’s not hard to understand, just a bit of infinitesimal calculus, at a basic level, entirely basic. You have two quantities x and y as variables. You can submit them to increases and to decreases of any sort. We call them, for example, D small a, D small b, whatever you want. And then you can make them undergo any increases or decreases whatever. [Pause] No, rather [let’s say] D small x, D small y. And then you can make them undergo additions and subtractions, [End of the Web Deleuze transcript; the remaining transcript is from the BNF recording] smaller than any given quantity. [Pause] We would call them, let’s say, Delta x and Delta y. [Pause] At the extreme, Delta x equals zero, Delta y equals zero. You’ll write Delta y over Delta x equals zero over zero. Is this ok? It’s not too difficult.
I’ll read you a text by Leibniz, and you’ll understand. [Deleuze looks up the text] “These are not absolutely nothings” – Delta x and Delta y – “These are not absolutely nothings; they are nothings only comparatively,” that is, Delta x equals zero in relation to x; Delta y equals zero in relation to y. – You’ll correct this; I’m so tired (abruti) that if I make a… But I think that this is quite simple. – However, Delta x and Delta y are still not the same thing and are not equivalent. [Interruption, different movements in the room; Deleuze asks help from the students with what he wants to display on the board] Voilà. [Deleuze watches the student, Richard Pinhas, who is writing the mathematical example on the board; pause of approximately 2 minutes]
Pinhas: Is that ok, what I’ve written?
Deleuze: That’s fine. You have to understand, there’s a small problem: it’s that x [Pause; Deleuze reads what’s on the board and hesitates, gives more instructions] – Place a big C… [Pinhas: Here?] and place a small c from A to C [Pinhas: A small c from A to C] and x by convention is equal to Ax [Pinhas follows the instructions while repeating them[ such that Cx equals Ax less Ac… Ok? [Pinhas: That’s good] That’s good. Everything is fine. [Pause ; several students ask questions about this presentation on the board] Eh? [Deleuze provides more instruction to Pinhas; someone asks: But where is it, the big X?] Obviously you cannot see it [probably hidden at the bottom of the board where a student is sitting]; this is going to end up badly like that other time. [Laughter]
Good. Let’s look at the minimum, ok? Do you want me to read the text? It’s beautiful, it’s quite beautiful. This will give you an idea of mathematical style of… [Deleuze does not read the text, but continues to have corrections made on the board] Be open solely to this: the line Cy, [Deleuze indicates the board] E and Cy are transported in parallel to themselves toward A. What’s happening? E tends toward zero, C tends toward zero. There we are. This is the whole mystery that you must understand. You have to understand that both of them tend toward zero, but they never become equal. Why? Because if they became equal, it would be necessary to, to what? It would be necessary that y, little y, the side A, little y, and the big Cy – are we giving it a name, the big Cy? – become equal as well. And, when you’ve obtained the coincidence in A, you’ve maintained your triangle, A-x-y, with its difference between x, that is, between Ax, and Ey. So, CE can coincide with A without losing their relation of the kind, so we’ll call it a kind, let’s say, differential rapport, Delta y over Delta x. Is this ok? Is it ok more or less?
Here’s what I am suggesting for you when you read these texts by Leibniz about the sea, etc. In the end, it’s not at all a question of the whole-part problem. What is it about? It’s about conditions in which a differential rapport has occurred in a way to produce something, [Pause] in a way to produce, we must add after this, indirectly. [Pause] Delta y over Delta x, you assimilate them to what? I need to have two terms. What’s going to be annoying in reading these texts by Leibniz is if I only hold onto one term, water. But I must have two terms, otherwise that makes no sense. I need to have water and the ear. [Pause] You have to consider the differential of water, let’s say, the… — in these texts, it’s deliberate, it’s not even science; it’s the way that, if you will, we can make a kind of mathematical allusion – you have to consider the differential of water, let’s say, the drop, the smallest drop, [Pause] and the differential of the ear in such a way that the whole text ought to be rewritten under the form Delta y over Delta x. [Pause] What are we told from differential calc… — I am speaking the most, in the most elementary way… [End of cassette; interruption of the BNF recording]
[Return to the BNF recording] … So, that works, and I insist on this greatly because I am struck by… Here I believe that the interpretations are going, generally that they are going… [Pause ; Deleuze doesn’t complete the sentence] I consider a different example, the eye. It’s the same thing, eh? I am looking at my field, I have a Delta x that is [Pause] grass, some grass, a tiny bit of grass, the smallest bit of grass. I have a Delta y, the tiniest, the tiniest glance, [Pause] Delta y over Delta x. – No, I cannot rightly say green; I am saying green grass. I withdraw the green; I especially haven’t said green… I didn’t say it? [The student near Deleuze recites: A tiny bit of grass] Ah, that’s it, I’m ok, the tiny bit of grass, and then my glance from the eye – Delta y over Delta x, no matter the conditions – here, there are condition, we could invent them biologically… I’m rather close, I’m rather close, I am awake, all that – Delta y over Delta x equals, equals what? The green, a green patch in the monad, a perception of green. This is an entire theory of perception.[18] You’ll tell me that matter really must act. No, not at all, for the moment, not at all. [Pause] You have some matter, there, you’re going to have it; we’ll see, you’re going to have it. You have a body, you have a body.
What I am in the process of explaining is how the most confused thing in the world is able to give you, or to communicate to the monad, a clear perception. With Delta y over Delta x, or rather to Delta y over Delta x corresponds – nothing more than corresponds – a perception included in the monad: it’s some green. – [As in the previous session, the sound of a squeaking door is heard] What is that? [A student near Deleuze: It’s the door] [Laughter] – I’d say that it’s a causality, it’s a causality, but a very odd one. It’s a causality between terms that don’t need to have anything whatsoever in common, what Leibniz would call an ideal causality. [Pause] I would explain the perception of green through Delta y over Delta x, of two bodily elements, the bit of grass, the glance from the eye.
Second argument, also very strange, a completely different argument: I am returning to my beaten dog or to the pin that is stuck when I am a poor little baby drinking his milk, the pin that my nursemaid cruelly sticks in me. [Laughter] So then, I feel a pain. However, Leibniz says, it’s odd because this pain does not resemble [Pause] the pin’s movement. [Pause] And there’s no doubt, right? [Pause] Likewise, the pain of the dog receiving the blow from the stick does not resemble the striking stick. So I’d almost like, I’d like to take you as witness. There are two extraordinary texts, in my view, extraordinary texts by Leibniz. — I think I’ve lost them so that… Aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe… I really better not have… [Pause; Deleuze looks through his texts] No, it’s not that one… [Deleuze keeps looking for the texts] It doesn’t matter because I have it elsewhere, but I don’t have… [Pause] And not here either… But I am going to find it. It does exist. [Pause] [A groan of frustration from Deleuze]… Ha, ha! There it is ! So, in all this, I’ve completely lost my effect because I no longer recall… [Laughter] [Pause] Here we are… [Pause; Deleuze continues to look in the text] I am trying to cut the text because I’m not managing… [Pause]
“And although it is true that their entire explication is beyond our forces” – he is saying, look, already to explain all that is really outside our strength – “because of the too great multitude of enveloped varieties, we are no less penetrated more and more by experiences that make us discover the bases of distinct thoughts of which light and colors provide us with examples. These confused feelings” – colors and light – “are not arbitrary” – these are perceptions, right, in the monads – “These confused feelings are not arbitrary, and we do not agree with the received opinion today of several people and supported by our author” – this about [John] Locke – “that there are no resemblances or rapports between our sensations and corporeal traces.” This is indeed our problem: there is a resemblance between the sensations in the monad and the corporeal traces of the body, in the body.
“It seems rather that our feelings represent them and express them perfectly. Someone will perhaps say that the feeling of heat does not resemble movement” — Someone will perhaps say that the feeling of heat does not resemble movement – “Yes! No doubt. It does not resemble a sensible movement such as that of a carriage wheel. But it resembles the assemblage of a thousand tiny movements of fire and organs that are its cause. Similarly, whiteness does not resemble a spherical convex mirror” — [Pause] whiteness does not resemble a spherical convex mirror – “However, it is nothing other than the assemblage of quantities of tiny convex mirrors such as we see in the foam by looking at it closely.” But he says an astonishing thing; he says one thing: you never find a resemblance between perception and the perceived object if you keep yourself within the limits of the fixed. If you pass on to the infinitesimal, you will then find yourself before white as sensation and an infinity of tiny convex mirrors. What is the resemblance of both? Foam. [Pause]
The other text, you’re going to see its… I only know two of them by Leibniz. It’s New Essays on Human Understanding, book 1. [Pause] He says this: before me, you know, philosophers have distinguished two kinds of qualities, primary qualities and secondary qualities. The primary qualities are extension, etc.; the secondary qualities are sensible qualities. And they said, at the extreme, primary qualities resemble the object, but secondary qualities are subjective like color, heat, and nothing corresponds to them in the object, at least nothing direct. And here is what he says in this text of the New Essays:
“I just noted how there is a resemblance or exact rapport regarding secondary qualities as well as regarding primary qualities.” For him, a resemblance has to go all the way there. This is enormous if you see what he means, what he is in the process of doing. One must master the confused insofar as it’s confused, if he finds a resemblance. If he finds a law of resemblance through the confused itself, well it’s a fantastic plus for him. “It is indeed reasonable that the effect responds to its cause; and how does one guarantee the opposite since we don’t know at all distinctly either the sensation of blue, for example, or the movements that produce it?” Hence the text that I wanted to reach: “It is true that pain does not resemble the movements of a pin” – the same thing, you recall; the other text said, it’s true that white does not resemble a convex mirror — “It is true that pain does not resemble the movements of a pin, but it can resemble quite well the movements that this pin causes in our body.”
This, I’d tell you… This is a text that doesn’t seem like much. What is he doing? I am commenting on a phrase: “It is true that pain does not resemble the movements of a pin,” which is not in the finest conditions of a proof. If I have a chance, I am not going to establish a term to term rapport, movement of the pin [to] pain, “but it can resemble quite well the movements that this pin causes in our body.” There, I have two terms, and furthermore, two terms that pass, that tend toward the infinitely small. As my wicked nursemaid moved the pin toward my body, this was a finite movement, but there, when she presses it into my poor body and turns it, [Laughter] you see, there I find myself faced with two corporeal factors. I find myself in the presence of a Delta y and a Delta x, and it’s this Delta y and this Delta x to which pain corresponds in the monad. And likewise for the white: as long as I was trying to place into connection [Pause] [The student near Deleuze tells him: Mirror] convex mirror [to] white, this was stupid. What I had to do was place into connection, on one hand, a material rapport, infinitely tiny mirrors and foam as physical phenomena, and it’s to this Delta y over Delta x rapport that will correspond the white in the soul. In both cases, you have pain in the soul equals Delta y over Delta x in the body, [Pause] and I believe that this is the only way to interpret these text, in any case, these two great, these two great texts by Leibniz, in such a condition, I am saying, what it is that makes me have a body.
There we are. So I can summarize in order to finish. I have a body. Why do I have a body ? It’s a consequence, nothing else than a consequence. I have a body because that results – this is a genetic point of view – that results from me having a clear region of expression. We especially must not reverse the causality. It’s the body that results from my clear region and not the reverse.
Second statute of the genesis: [Pause] Why am I sure about having a body? [Pause] Because what I express clearly in my monad corresponds to my body, because what I express clearly in my monad corresponds to something of the Delta y over Delta x kind, [Pause] which is like the ideal cause or the object, and the resembling object of my perception. So there is a resembling object of my perception, so there is an ideal cause in my perception, and it’s not only my body, but the rapport of my body to all other bodies. We find ourselves henceforth faced with two kinds of rapport, a rapport of bodies between one another to infinity, a rapport of monads between one another to infinity. This is not the same type of rapport, for a simple reason: it’s that bodies exert a direct causality on each other, whereas monads do nothing other than inter-express themselves, that is, express a one and same world, each one being without doors or windows.
There we have it; this is what I wanted… The next time, you’ll tell me if… and then we will draw some new conclusions, and we will begin the story of harmony. You sense why we have reached harmony: it because, between all these operation of the body and all these operations of monads, there has to be something that implicates itself as harmony.
Question: Can you give us the references for the two texts [by Leibniz]?
Deleuze: Euh, New Essays, book 1… Yes, in fact, for me, these two Leibniz texts are essential.  Euh, book 2, New Essays, chapter 8, and the other, [Pause; Deleuze looks in his text and consults the student next to him] in the Guérard edition, eh? Volume 4, [Pause; noises of students leaving] page 575, and the title is… [Pause] Eh, the title is complicated… [Pause] That [reference] depends on if you have another edition… [Pause] This belongs [Pause] to texts among a whole group entitled “Explication of the new system concerning the soul and the body”, and this precise text is “Addition to the explication.”

Lecture 19, 26 May 1987: Review of the Two Floors, and the Rapport of Harmony
So, listen up, if you hear me. As I told you the last time, we have two sessions, and I ask you to forgive me for presenting them to you so quickly. And then, and then, for a thousand reasons, I can no long continue. So, [we have] today and next week, after which our work for this year is over. The other Tuesdays, I will come solely to take care of students in the premier cycle, deuxième cycle, troisième cycle for the assignments that some among you need to submit to me.[2] So I will set up meetings at the usual hours, or rather, a bit later, say, around ten o’clock. So, this will be of interest only for those who have some kind of relationship with the university program, to take care of all the details. If there are any situations that we need to deal with immediately, because I received a memo saying that this is your business to be informed, all that, but the memo says some of you need certificates in advance. So I will come solely for that. If by some bad luck I weren’t able to come, then those who need to see me for signatures, etc., or administrative details, I ask you to please phone me, but without taking advantage of this. My number is in the phone book. So there we are. What remains is today and the next time, and it’s quite simple.
It’s a bit as if this course on Leibniz, by moving forward a little and then especially often by moving back, had developed like a research project that should have lasted two years, such that what I am doing now is much more [than] what would have been the material for another year. And since we have today and next week, I am trying to make things as clear as possible today, and I want to propose to you a series, how to say, of pathways concerning the two floors since it was our departure point. This is a philosophy of two floors, a kind of visit of the two floors, or if you prefer, a collection, almost of musings (rêveries) — I would really like for you to intervene if there is a point that… [Deleuze does not complete this sentence] — some musings about this organization of Leibniz’s philosophy, and notably about the role played by the living (le vivant) or the organic. And that should take us into the respective rapports of the two floors – summarily, rapports of souls and bodies – but we will have seen in the meantime that it’s not the rapports of souls and bodies. That is why I say “musings” because each time that I pronounce a sentence, you have to wait for the moment to correct it, or for you to correct it yourself. It’s not my fault; it’s Leibniz’s style.
And so we must get to these two floors: do they have a common law? What are their rapports? And we sense this rapport already: it’s what Leibniz will call the rapport of harmony, harmony of souls among themselves, harmony of bodies among themselves, harmony of souls with bodies. And where we wanted to end from the very start is precisely with this concept of harmony, that’s become fundamental for philosophy: what does its relation with what is taking place at about the same period in music? [Pause] For example, someone gave me a little book by Rameau in which I read “the expression of outward appearance (du physique) is in the measure and the movement.” If I read most stupidly, through association of ideas, I tell myself that this perhaps refers to the music that came before. The expression of outward appearance is in the measure and in the movement: we already know that, in Leibniz, — although on this point, I haven’t been far off – we know already that in Leibniz, it’s not movement that matters, but it’s a reason of the movement that he will call force. I continue: “The expression of outward appearance is in the measure and in the movement. The expression of the pathetic, on the contrary …” Is it with Leibniz that the pathetic arrives? Yes indeed. Here, I am editing, but no matter, we’re musing.
Ah yes, pathos arrives. Why? Because he will tell us that beyond movement, there is something else. And beyond movement, what is it? It is alteration, variation, pathos. “The expression of outward appearance is in the measure and the movement”; we can now read almost, “the expression of outward appearance of music of the past is in the measure and the movement; the expression of the pathetic, on the contrary, is in harmony and inflections.” Perhaps you remember [that] this was one of our first words this year, when it was a question of defining Leibniz’s philosophy, saying: let’s start from inflections. “[The expression] of the pathetic, on the contrary, is in harmony and inflections, that one must weigh before deciding about what must determine one’s preference (emporter la balance).” What does this mean? Rameau tells us: Reflect well, musicians, about which determines one’s preference: either measure and movement that constitute outward appearance, the musical constitution, or the pathetic that resides in harmony and inflections.
And if one agrees with the idea that, almost at the same period, harmony in music undergoes a very important mutation, [Pause] which already will concern Montiverdi and will fundamentally concern Bach, can’t one also think that, when Leibniz presents what he gives us as one of its fundamental concepts – pre-established harmony, and his opposing Descartes and the Cartesians with pre-established harmony and, at the same time, reproaching Descartes and the Cartesians for have settled only on movement and, in doing so, to have understood nothing about the nature of movement – can’t one tell oneself: yes, we’ve got something here, we’ve got something here? We might be shocked that the confrontation between Leibniz and music has not yet sufficiently occurred. [Pause]
So let’s try to construct these floors, this history, the two Baroque floors. You recall, we had mentioned this: what is fundamental is a line in inflections. Why is that so fundamental? I am not starting over; I assume you have it in mind somewhat. Why is this… This is a line that is not straight line, but that presents singularities, intrinsic singularities, you recall, a line that represents, let’s call it abstract representation of a line that presents intrinsic singularities: this is a line in inflections.[3] We saw it, for example, in Paul Klee’s work from the start. We had said: that’s it, you know, the Baroque line. [Pause] But, concretely, what does that mean? Concretely, that means: Pause] what matters, and almost the unity of the world, is the event. The event is an inflection. Inflection is the abstract figure of the event: the event is the concrete case of inflection. [Pause]
 
And what is the world? It’s an aggregate, an infinite succession of inflections or events that will be named: states of the world. To which you will tell me, perhaps: it’s like a curious way of defining and beginning to present a floor that you already expected – by virtue of our past – in what would be the floor of souls, and then of invoking events and inflections. This is because already everything is mixed together. Socrates sits in his prison. You see, Socrates sits in his prison, that’s a reference to a famous text by Plato. Why is Socrates seated in prison awaiting death? And Plato asks: does he have knees that could fold? [Laughter] Ok yes, he has knees that could fold. That doesn’t prevent that it’s not due to him having knees that could fold that he’s sitting in prison. He is sitting in prison because he is quite fine with that. What is so fine? He finds that it is quite fine not to try to escape. He awaits his condemnation. What does that mean? Understand: every act must be connected to two things at once: efficient causes, Plato will already say — but also Leibniz, and he will say it with more force — and final causes. Socrates is seated in prison because he finds that fine: a final cause. Good.
I am going to say something very simple: every event is an event of the spirit, and I mean nothing else. Or if you prefer, it goes without saying that every event concerns bodies, and no doubt I couldn’t cite a single event that doesn’t concern bodies, but I only say: that aspect, we leave it aside for the moment. It’s understood that we cannot say everything at once, so the aspect through which the event concerns bodies, we won’t get involved with that at the moment because there is another aspect of the event. If you tell me: but isn’t that a duality? No, it’s not a duality, one is strictly in the other – but in what manner? What relation is there between the two aspects? The event is indeed in bodies, but it is not only in bodies.
So fine, that clarifies a little bit. That answers the objection that I posed to myself: how do you say… I am going to talk to you about the spirit, and then begin with an event like being seated in his prison. And we saw how Leibniz moved forward in this discovery of the spirit. It’s that the line in inflections, or the line in events, is enveloped in a spiritual unity that will be called monad. We go from inflection to envelopment. I won’t go back over that. As result, if it is true that every inflection is a singularity, an intrinsic singularity, we have to say that a monad is a condensation of singularities, or that, if you prefer, a monad expresses the world. [Pause]
In what sense does it express the world? Events are its predicates. And we have seen the extent to which it could be ruinous for an understanding of Leibniz’s philosophy to think that predicates were attributes, attributes of judgment, whereas predicates were events as expressed by propositions. The type of proposition in Leibniz is not “the sky is blue”; it’s “Caesar crosses the Rubicon”. Understand why I insist so much on that: if we don’t have that, if we don’t grasp that in a very lively manner, then we understand strictly nothing of what Leibniz means. And if we linked Leibniz so strongly to Whitehead, it’s for this reason: these are philosophers of the event for whom, in the end, everything is event, and in that very way, everything is a predicate of subjects, of individual unities that express the world. [Pause]
So, this is a first step that allows me to say at once, if you recall, that allows me to say, at once, we have to say at once each individual substance, each monad, each soul or spirit – all that, let’s take these as identical – each individual substance, each soul or spirit, each monad expresses the totality of the world. [Pause] And we have to say at once that monads are for this world that they express – if the world had been different, the monads would have been different since they would have expressed another world. So, we must say at once that monads are for the world that they express, but that this world does not exist outside the monads that express it. So as a result, what is the world? It is the common expressed (exprimé) of all the monads that God has caused to come into existence. He could have caused other monads to come into existence, fine, but at that point, this would have been another world. He would have chosen another world, and we have seen this strange notion of world’s choice for Leibniz.
Let us take yet another step forward in examining this [upper] floor – you see [that] we are therefore on the floor, on a very odd floor, but I have insisted at least on us having completed this point from where we began: that the world is expressed by each monad, yes, and as the world does not exist outside the monads that express it, one has to say that each monad has an infinity of folds, the world is folded into each monad. And this theme of folding already appeared on the level of the spirit. But immediately the problem returned: good, so why not a single monad? Why [are there] so many monads? Why is there an infinity of monads that express the same world? The answer that Leibniz gave us is, why isn’t there a single world, a single God, a single… Why was Spinoza wrong, according to Leibniz? Leibniz’s answer is that there is indeed an individual reason, a principle of individuation of monads, specifically that they all express the same infinite world, to infinity, but they only express clearly a tiny portion of the world. Each of us only expresses clearly a tiny portion of the world, so that from the start, you see, this floor of souls, independently of the body – that is what matters to Leibniz, that darkness does not come from the body. It’s the soul, once again, it’s the soul that is dark, it’s the soul that is obscure. It only has a tiny region of clarity. Its tiny region of clarity is the privileged portion that it especially expresses. It especially expresses a privileged notion: you, me, someone who lived a thousand years ago. We don’t express the same region of the world, as he says so well, once again: each has one’s own subdivision, about which we say – and I won’t go back over this – the extent to which it could be reduced or extended, the extent to which, for example, in the damned, it would be reduced to a nothing, and on the other hand, for the man of progress, it was going to extend. But finally, all of this is the notions that cause us to visit this floor of the souls.
[A student near Deleuze whispers something to him] What? [She tells him that there is someone with a question] Yes, yes, do stop me, indeed stop me. This is like a visit; it’s as if I told you, there we have an apartment with two floors. So if you ask me: ah, ok, what is that good for? We can do a bit of administration (gestion). Go ahead.
Question (from a woman student): There’s a little something bothering me: is it only because all monads are in contact with each other that we can deduce that the world does not exist outside of these monads?
Deleuze: No, for that would be contradictory. If I was saying monads have strictly nothing to do with each other because they are in contact, that wouldn’t work because this contact [Interruption of the BNF recording; text from Web Deleuze] would form just a bit of something in common, a common world. What happens is that monad, we cannot even say…, Leibniz says in a text: we cannot say that they are far off or distant, they have neither doors nor windows. They are entirely closed in on themselves, [Return to the BNF recording] they are closed off.
Question [same student]: But still, you once spoke about a rapport that they all had there, even if they are without doors or windows. Because with all this rapport, this seems to me… No, because it’s still something strange to say that monads are for the world that they express, but this world does not exist outside these monads.
Deleuze: That’s it, that’s the essential point. This is essential. I mean, in fact, the question is very good because if you lose one of the two aspects, you are done for. I mean, we must at all costs maintain the two aspects. To say, we have to say… Of course, the world does not exist outside the monads. How would it exist? It does not exist outside monads for a very simple reason which is: every predicate is in the subject. We saw this long analysis; or if you prefer, all that gives rise to an inflection is folded into the monad, so there is no world that would not be folded into this kind of envelope: the monad, you or me.
You know, I am thinking of something completely different in saying this. I am thinking of a famous text by Proust about how a world can be folded into a character, into a person. This is the case [here]: for Leibniz, the world is perpetually folded into individual unities. Why? So, if we say this is because, if you understand well that the event is always an inflection, [Pause] well then, the inflection no longer exists except as “enveloped in”. – [Deleuze talks quietly to a woman student near him who wants to intervene] So, excuse me, I’m not going to start all over.  I am just completing this so that you can then speak. — So I can say: the world exists only in the monads that express it; but I also have to say: monads exist only for the world that they express. Why? Because Leibniz constantly comes back to this — a typical example — : God did not create Adam the sinner; he created the world in which Adam sinned. He did not create a particular monad, a particular other world, a particular other monad, because at that point, they wouldn’t express the same world. He created a world; he could have created another one. When he caused this world to come into existence, he made it pass into, and by creating, the infinity of monads that express this world. Otherwise, he can no longer do anything. If he creates a common world, if he creates a common world in which there would be individuals, subjects, etc., [Pause] we would be in a situation, fine, but [what of] the other worlds that he could have created? One has to, if you wish to… [Pause] He has the conception of an infinity of possible worlds, which are not, as [Leibniz] says, compossible with one another. He chooses one of these worlds, the one with the most reality, the one with the greatest quantity of reality, as [Leibniz] says, that is, the most perfect. But this world has no existence in itself independently of individual substances, since individual substances are the very reality that has no existence outside the individual substances that express it. I insist on this because if we don’t understand at this level, I believe that we will understand nothing there.
I am almost getting ahead of something: what does the notion of harmony mean? When Leibniz uses the word, and I am not talking in musical terms, nor philosophical terms, I am saying, on the occasion of this question: let’s consider a hypothesis, that will already be useful for our next meeting, it will be useful for the next meeting. Harmony, you understand, there is an enormous number of texts by Leibniz on harmony. So, we are looking at what they have in common, and I believe that if one brought together all the texts, as we won’t have the time to do, one already sees that harmony is a rather odd rapport; it’s a rapport that concerns expression. It’s a rapport of expression, and it is expression as rapport. Indeed, I am saying that would perhaps suit us for music, because in a certain manner – maybe we will see it next time – it’s with the Baroque that music calls for an expressive value. [With] the expressive value of music, there you already have the introduction of the Baroque. This is perhaps a bit what Rameau called “the pathetic”, but we will see.
I am saying harmony is a rapport of expression – but what is the rapport of expression? Let’s clarify this; this isn’t going to help us go forward very far. I am calling rapport of expression a rapport between a term called “expresser” (exprimant) and term named “expressed” (exprimé). [Pause] Fine, [that makes] no sense unless I define this rapport, I would say, in what time? So, if expression is a rapport between an expresser and an expressed, what does this rapport consist of? I propose a hypothesis: it’s double. On one hand, the expressed does not exist outside its expresser; on the other hand, and at the same time, the expresser is in a regulated correspondence with its expressed. [Pause] Oh, what joy! I wouldn’t have believed to achieve something so clear and abstract at the same time. I believe that’s it, that’s what harmony is, and is unsuitable for anything else: two things are in harmony when they are in the same situation.
I refer, for example to a text for those who might have considered this, but it’s in Latin, and to my knowledge, it hasn’t been translated. This is Quid sit idea, “what an idea is”, in the seventh volume of Oeuvres philosophiques, Quid sit idea, in which Leibniz analyzes the rapport of expression. I believe that this text, I don’t want to say too much, I can’t say that this [quote] is in this text, but I am saying that perhaps the text supports this conclusion that I am drawing, this relation between expresser and expressed. Both of them are necessary, if you will, at the same time: what I express does not exist outside of me; it’s a strange relation.  That’s why I was telling you: there is torsion, there’s a torsion between expresser and expressed. There is torsion outside of me. What I am expressing does not exist outside of me, and at the same time, I myself exist only in a regulated correspondence with what I express. What is this in mathematics? If suddenly, I dare everything, but you know, it’s not far, it’s not exactly far from what is called a function. And I don’t know if in mathematics one couldn’t say – I know who could tell us, but it bothers me to disturb him – if one couldn’t already say something like that in mathematics, that a function is fundamentally expressive, if there aren’t both characteristics, if one function is not a rapport between two terms such that one doesn’t exist independently from the other and the other doesn’t exist independently from a regulated correspondence with the first. I say at once: the world that God chose does not exist outside monads that express it. Differently, we have seen that there are no two monads who express the world in the same way – we saw this, it’s the theory of point of view, and we saw what the theory of point view consisted of: that each of us has his/her subdivision, his/her tiny portion of clear expression.[4]
Question [from a student]: [The question is nearly inaudible, except for what Deleuze repeats] Where does this limit come from?
Deleuze: Where does this limit come from? We are finite. Every creature is finite. There is only one being that does not have this limit, God, who expresses adequately and distinctly not only the universe that it has chosen, but the infinity of other universes. But our finitude means that we only express a single world among all the compossible worlds, on one hand, and that we only express clearly a tiny region of this world. What is this a result of? It’s a result of our finitude, that is, of the fact that we not only have an expressive force, but that we have – we saw it in a previous meeting – a primary matter, primary matter meaning: power of finitude (puissance de finitude).
Question [from the woman student near Deleuze]: If all monads are finite, through God the world must nonetheless be infinite…
Deleuze: Yeah, since there is an infinity of monads.
The student: …that still lets one assume that there is a world that might exist outside the monads.
Gilles: Why? [Pause] No, we have to find another word. I believe that it’s… A long time ago, related entirely to something else, we happened to, I proposed another expression: the world does not exist outside monads – we have to say that it insists. It does not exist. — This is really odd. In this, I was expecting there to be no difficulty, and I am always surprised. — I am saying: monads are the existence of the world. I mean, for me — not for me, for Leibniz. That goes so much without saying that the world does not exist outside of monads since if one asks, “what is the existence of the world?”, he says, its monads.
The student: But God is more than the totality of monads.
Deleuze: Obviously… It creates them. [The student: Well yes] It chooses the world.
The student: So, for me, that leaves me to assume there’s one more.
Deleuze: One more, the monads ? [The student: Yes] It’s God. [The student: Yes] That’s all. [Laughter] … At this stage, right? Don’t make me say… At this stage, it’s all. On this visit to the apartment where we are.
The student : That is, there’s a part of the world that exists… Ah, no, you said one, one, one that…
Deleuze: Yes! It’s the little drawing that… It’s the little drawing, so I have to redo it? Because we recall that… [Pause; sound of Deleuze going to the board] I am going to make a little illuminating drawing, but I don’t know if this is very clear now.[5] [Pause] – Ah, that one was prettier, right? — I will do it in dots because as world, it only has virtual existence. [Pause] But it becomes actual, it is only actual in the monads that express it and of which each one expresses it [the world] in its entirety. What differences are there between monads? They will express it [the world] in its entirety from a point of view – here this is getting complicated, it’s not going well at all – from a point of view, that is, each has its privileged zone. And here, you ask me, does that exist? Yes, that exists, but that exists there! As a result, one can say: the world exists only in monads, but each monad has a regulated rapport with the world, according to its own point of view. [Pause; Deleuze returns to his seat, and speaks to the student] No? I sense that you are not Leibnizian… [She begins to answer, but is interrupted]
Question [from the back of the room]: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: What? [The student continues his question]
Deleuze: Ah, no, impossible. There are… Unless I’ve misunderstood, there is an absolute irreductibility of monads each in relation to the others. You see why? It’s because what he [Leibniz] does not want is the idea of a single world. In some ways… — [Someone speaks to Deleuze quietly] There’s a what? There’s a machine? Oh, leave it, leave it… It’s fine, that means it’s working… Yes, yes, I’m always surprised… — Yes, [Deleuze speaks to someone near him, possibly Isabelle Stengers] save me because…
Question (possibly from Isabelle Stengers): In physico-mathematics, the problem is posed practically at the end of the eighteenth century; the physicists-mathematicians constructed global functions, for example, potential energy, the field – in fact, the ancestor of field theory today — and at the beginning [they] were constructed starting from forces which had purely local definitions. But when one speaks of the definition of potential (right after Lagrange), force no longer appears other than as a function that is a local derivative of a function that represents the integral aspect of the system at the same moment. During this whole time, there was a perfect symmetry between the idea that forces were, basically, only local derivatives of the integral field or that the integral field was constructed by integration starting from local forces. [Deleuze: yes, yes…] The rapport of symmetry was posed by electromagnetism. [Deleuze say: yes, yes…] The field gained its autonomy but there was always a problem: it didn’t reconcile Einstein’s relativity that is about the gravitational field and electromagnetism … [The comments become unclear]
Deleuze: So, we agree, and we who are Leibnizians, we can say — of course, it’s not he who resolved the problems of contemporary science – but if we try to…, that he would resolve the problem that you state at the level of the other floor, at the level of the theory of matter, which we are going to see if we continue this visit. So, [Deleuze speaks to Stengers], agreed?
Stengers : Yes !
Deleuze : Are you a bit of a Leibnizian?
Stengers : Oh, I don’t know why I would be.
Deleuze : Oh, you mustn’t look too much for a why, don’t go looking for a why… And I’m going to confess something: me neither. [Laughter] But me, I know why! [Laughter]
So let’s just continue in this room, that I am calling the room of souls. You see, it is enormous since it already contains the entire world, the world expressions, the incompossible worlds, that’s it, freedom, in short, everything that we have said. — I am saying, a final effort. — Each of us has his/her subdivision, and it’s on this that I insist: we have not yet had the body intervene. What we have had intervene is, you remember? Primary matter, that is, every individual substance or monad includes a primitive, active force and a primitive, passive force, [Pause] a primitive passive force named primary matter and that’s united with its finitude. [Pause]
In other words, that I don’t express the totality of the world clearly, that I only have a tiny bit of clear expression, what is that? It’s nothing other than a way of saying that there are several monads, that I am not alone in the world. The darkness (le sombre) in me is part of others. [Pause] Darkness – Yes you can open it [the door] now. It’s too warm… You can, go open up from the back – [Shadow] is part of others; it’s the plurality of monads that results in only God not being in shadows. But us, we have a dark part, a blackened part, we have a dark part that is the depth of our soul. And that does not mean Evil. This will be the possibility of Evil, but it does not mean Evil. It means that all truth must be ripped from this darkness. And the starting point of all ripping of the truth is the tiny clear region that each of us expresses. And we saw this: from that point onward, souls or spirits, but reasonable souls and spirits in fact have a manner of gaining access to the truth.
And the last time we especially saw this thanks to the analysis of perception. The interior perceptions of the monad, since in expressing the world, the monads perceive event; we saw that these perceptions consisted of drawing from darkness a clarity or tiny unnoticed perceptions – as [Leibniz] says, a remarkable perception. It’s still the theory of singular points, the theory of remarkable points. And we saw how in each monad this constitution of a remarkable perception occurred. And starting from the constitution of remarkable perception, we gain access to other truths that we analyzed, I remind you, and that were analyses of series, of series converging toward requisites that go beyond things, perceptible things toward requisites and infinite series that went farther, all the way to the idea of God. I won’t go back over that, but all of it increases more and more the size of the apartment.
And well, we’ll finish with this floor and immediately ask: what, what is happening? There’s only this, in my opinion, in the first apartment, that’s all there is. That’s all there is. We have done it all, accounting for the enormous problems posed here: the problem of freedom, the problem, etc. And suddenly what is it that’s going to define the other floor? Well, it’s: “I have a body!” I must add, in my first floor, that there already is a great variety: it’s because all monads do not have equal value (ne se valent pas). Not only did we see that monads had larger or smaller clear zones of expression, but aren’t there already some that would be happy with a zone of remarkable or distinctive (remarquée) perception and would not achieve divine truths, would not reach infinite series? We have to leave this. What would these monads be? In other words, is every monad a reasonable soul or spirit? [Pause] At the floor we are on, one can only encounter reasonable souls or spirits.
So I say: go on, jump to the other floor, and what makes us jump is a kind of stairs, which is what? It’s the announcement: I have a body. The announcement I have a body! [Pause] Understand how this opens me up… I was telling you, what is it that’s going to open? What requires that I have a body? It is the event. The event is not happy with the first floor. So, I have to put it, if I attempt an outline, I have to put it [the event] between the two. And in the end perhaps, all will be between the two since what was it we saw as apartment on the first floor? It’s the event as spiritual determination. And what is the event as spiritual determination? It’s the event or the inflection insofar as it is actualized, insofar as it’s actualized in an individual subject. [Pause]
You recall: the world is a virtuality, and it’s here that the Leibnizian couple virtual-actual plays out. The world is a virtuality that is actualized in each monad that expresses it. If you prefer: the monad is the actual existence of the world, and the world exists actually only in the monads, otherwise it’s pure virtuality. And what else does that event call for? It’s quite beautiful! It seems to me very beautiful: so, finally, you say, ok, Socrates is seated in his prison because he finds it good. But then we must add other things. He must also have knees that fold. In other words, I see nothing more beautiful than to tell you such a simple thing: the event also must inscribe itself in the body. The event must also inscribe itself in the body. In other words, the event is not only a virtuality that awaits you and spies on you and that is actualized in your soul. The event is a possibility that is realized in your body, and that is going to be, that’s going to be the lower floor. [Pause]
But, “I have a body” – why? First reason: because, well it’s precisely because I can only express a clear, reduced portion, precisely because I can only express a tiny portion. God has no body. [Pause] The body is exactly my subdivision. [Pause] And recall what we expressed forcefully: above all, do not create the change that would render Leibniz incomprehensible. It’s not because I have a body that I have a reduced portion of expression. It’s because I have a reduced portion of expression that henceforth I have a body. In fact, what I express, what my monad expresses clearly, it is what will be stated as concerning my body, and henceforth concerning the rapport of other bodies with mine. In other words, an event cannot be realized in a body that would not be mine; it can only be realized in an interaction of bodies on my own. [Pause] That I have a body is a result [Pause] of my finitude, that is, of the passive power of action (puissance) or, if you prefer, due to my having only a very, very limited zone of clear expression.
Question from a student: Is the realized event the deployment of time? Where is time?
Deleuze: The realized event is not the deployment of time; your question is quite correct since we haven’t spoken about time and space at all. Time and space will follow this entire aggregate. There is a space and a time on the upper floor, simply this time will be uniquely the order of possible co-existents. For example, your monad, your spirit as spirit either coexists or does not exist, for example, with Caesar’s. You are not of the same era. That is already completely understood. So time as order of possible successions, and space as order of possible coexistences belong to the first [upper] floor. This space, on the other hand, has nothing to do — I am answering your question the best that I can — this space and this time still have nothing to do with extension (étendue) and duration. Extension and duration belong to the other one. [The student: It’s infinite] What rapport would there… It’s infinite? It’s infinite? No, not in the first sense. It’s not an infinite time since it is second in relation to what fulfills it. It is only infinite as a consequence; there would not be an empty time and space that would be fulfilled by the action of God. What I call space and time is the order of coexistences and of successions between monads, so that to say they could change its location, its places in space, or moments in time, without themselves changing, would make no sense.
Question from the same student: It would be infinitely virtual?
Deleuze: It’s infinitely virtual? No, [Deleuze laughs] well, yes and no, yes and no. It is virtual if you identify it in the time of the world. It is actual if you take it as the order of succession of monads, of monads that are actual. The complicated problem will be mathematical, because you sense that on the first [upper] floor, there is a logic of time defined as the order of successions, for example, or a logic of space, and Leibniz will insist a lot on the distinction of words. On this floor, he only uses the terms spatium¸ space, and tempus, time. When you see the word extensio or extensum, they never refer to that; on the contrary, they refer to something that already concerns the body. So the problem is what rapports are there between the spatio and the extensio, for example. This will be, I believe, one of the most audacious mathematical theories of Leibniz. But finally, there you are, this is all I can say quickly.
So, I am saying, you see: each of us has a body; each of us has a body, and at the same time, one has a body on which other bodies interact. [Pause] See Monadology for example. – [Deleuze looks for his text, unsuccessfully] Euh, I don’t know… No matter, I’ve quoted them elsewhere, and so this is enough. Monadology, it’s a tiny little text. [Laughter] [Pause]
And there is already a problem since you have two systems; two floors are subordinated to two completely different modes of construction. The first [upper] floor has for its mode of construction [Pause] a virtual world [Pause] that only exists actually in each monad; in other words, each monad expresses the totality of the world and includes the totality of the world. At the level of bodies where you are, this is no longer that at all. Bodies are outside one another and interact one upon the other. Monads, on the contrary, are such that the world is interior to each of them and they are without windows or doors, that is, they do not interact. Each expresses the world for itself, without doors or windows, whereas here, there is an interaction, an interaction of bodies. [Pause]
And I would say: what I express clearly in the world, these are bodies that affect mine; these are the bodies that directly affect my own, and it is through this process of affection, then, of the interaction of bodies, that something on that floor is going to respond to the interior perceptions of monads. We saw it the last time, when I tried to analyze the example of the drop of water and the wave, [Pause] and we saw that between the liquid body and my body, at the limit, a kind differential rapport, dx/dy, was constituted; on the other floor, a distinguished perception was constituted in the monad: I heard the sound of the water. You already see that there is a correspondence between the two floors, but each of them has its law – they do not obey the same law. There is a law that is the interaction of bodies upon each other, and another law that is: monads, [Pause] each of which expresses the entire universe, and that do not communicate with one another.
So, that creates a problem for us. I mean, how to take account of such a difference between the two floors? But, what is there between the two floors? This is the same as asking: what is my body made of? If we asked that, that would almost be enough for us. So, make an effort: what is my body made of? What is the body made of? It’s not easy to understand, in Leibniz, what the body is made of, and for me, this seems to be one of the greatest mysteries in all the philosophies of the seventeenth century. I would say that a body is made – not for everyone, in fact, but for Leibniz and for Spinoza; there’s that in common between Leibniz and Spinoza. In Leibniz and Spinoza, a body is made of an infinity of infinitely tiny actual parts. Any body is constituted by an infinity of infinitely tiny actual parts. One cannot reach a final part. It’s what we call the actual infinite (l’infini actuel). [Pause] You have to imagine it, that what’s so great, you have to imagine it, because it’s quite properly unimaginable. It’s mathematisable, but it’s unimaginable.
Follow me: that is opposed to two things. It’s opposed, on the one hand, to atoms. With atoms, there is always, however far off that this might be, there is always a final part, an irreducible final part. There, on the contrary, it’s an infinity of actual parts such that there is no final part, and any part still includes an infinity of actual parts. And on the other hand, it’s not a divisible kind to infinity, it’s not infinitely divisible since [there’s] the infinity of actual parts such that no part can be said to be the smallest; [they] are precisely given actually, exist actually, and do not depend on the process of division that the aggregate is forced to undergo. [Pause] It’s what these authors will say or try to explain by saying: these are non-numerable multiplicities, that is, [Pause] that are not of the nature of the number. [Pause] They are, properly speaking, innumerable, which does not keep us from saying that a body is the double of another. A body can very well be the double of another, but it includes, no less than the other, an infinity of infinitely tiny actual parts. Is such a conception… It’s what Leibniz will affirm ten times by saying: the only infinite is actual – and quite often, I believe I’ve told you this too quickly, but I repeat it — quite often someone criticized other Leibniz texts where Leibniz says that infinitesimal calculus, or even the calculus of infinite series, is only a mathematical fiction. But it seems quite evident to me that there is no contradiction, and that means that even infinitesimal calculus does not take account of this state of the actual infinite.
So, assume [there are] collections of infinite parts, these are parts of infinite parts, without your being able to reach the final one, and that nonetheless are actually given, contrary to what happens in a divisibility to infinity. Every body is of this type. [Pause] When I say, I have a body, I mean [that] I consist of an infinity of infinitely tiny parts, actually, actually. [Pause]
Question from a student: Is it because they are actual that one avoids Zeno’s paradox, that is… ? [Deleuze’s voice covers the student’s complete question]
Deleuze: That’s it, absolutely. That’s also why there is in this a particular conception of movement that depends on force.
The student: Movement in the process of occurring.
Deleuze: That’s it.
Question, perhaps from Isabelle Stengers: So the soul is finite, but not the body?
Deleuze: No. The question is not about knowing whether the soul is finite but not the body. The question is that everything is at once, except God, finite and infinite. That is, for God, its account is covered, it is infinite. Whew, that’s done, it’s done (fini), if I dare say that, no more discussion. But everything that is finite is infinite from a certain aspect, and some infinities, I was telling you, that’s it. [End of the cassette; interruption in the BNF recording] It seems to me that the secret of seventeenth century thought is the distinction of orders of infinity. And, if God is infinite and if it is the primary infinity, it’s because it is stated as: infinite through the self (infini par soi). It is infinite through the self. But immediately, there is a second infinity that is the infinite through its cause. [Return to the BNF recording] Infinity through its cause is that of creatures. So, monads are infinite through their cause. Why are they infinite? No, rather, they are finite; they are not infinite because these are creatures, created by God. But they are infinite, simply infinite through their cause, and why? Because God creates them in such a way that they express the totality of an infinite world. And their formula is that, henceforth, they will have an infinity of predicates, and this infinity through its cause has for expression, we saw this, 1 over infinity (1 / infini); whereas God through its cause would have for expression infinity over 1 (infini / 1), that is, infinity as individuality, infinity as personal being. So, on the first [upper] floor, monads are finite and they are infinite.
Now, when we reach bodies and aggregates of actually infinite parts to infinity, it’s the third sense of infinity, specifically: an infinity that is caught in limits, a portion of matter, and whatever might be the limits and the narrowness of limits considered, that is properly speaking non-enumerable (indénombrale). So it’s something finite (du fini) since it is caught between limits; it is infinite since it includes an infinity of actual parts. It’s the third infinity. Are there any others? Alas, there are still others, but we will stick with these because it’s the three great, they are the three great modes of infinity. Once again, what I am saying is not valid for everyone, but only for Leibniz and Spinoza.
So I say: that’s what it is, first, having a body. Fine, and what does that mean? You remember, so let us add: Why did I have a body? I had a body because I only saw, I only had a subdivision, etc., I only had a tiny clear subdivision. But why did I only have a tiny clear subdivision? Because I was a creature, because I was finite, in other words, because I have a primary matter, and a primary matter, as we saw, is not having a body; it’s the requirement for having a body. And so, the requirement for having a body, so fine, there it’s satisfied. [Pause] This is why Leibniz will say… These infinite aggregates of actually infinite tiny parts, you must not be surprised that he calls them secondary matter. I’ve barely said that, and I must tell you, expect me to have to correct this; it’s not enough. But it’s an aspect of secondary matter. Secondary matter will be the form through which matter realizes the requirement of primary matter, [Pause] of finitude. It returns in our entire story: we are finite, so we can only express a finite part, so we have a body. [A student’s voice is heard asking a question] Ah, there is an immanence of the monad in primary matter, absolute, completely. [Deleuze speaks to the students nearby him] – Hey, that’s getting complicated, right? But at the same time, this should be concluded because… So you do see the problem that we are now facing? It’s fine, but… — What is my body? How is it my body? Something must constitute my body. [Pause] I have a finite aggregate of infinitely tiny material parts, but how does all that concern me? [Pause]
Secondary matter also has two aspects, and we have only given one aspect of secondary matter. It’s that this infinite aggregate of infinitely tiny matter includes at the same time an infinity of tiny souls, [A student near Deleuze repeats: The souls] tiny souls, as if we were going back up to the first [upper] floor. The tiny souls, you will see, the tiny souls, but what? — I hesitate between two things: if I go very slowly, we will get lost; if I go real fast, we will get even more lost. — Secondary matter should include… I really don’t know… Wait, yes! An infinite aggregate of actually infinite tiny parts, but they only belong to me under the hypothesis of an infinity of tiny souls. But it’s Cartesian nonetheless; there is a real distinction between soul and body. Yes! But you remember that it seemed to me to be one of Leibniz’s most astonishing bold strokes: the real distinction does not imply separability. My body is constituted by an infinity of tiny souls animating an infinity of infinitely tiny organic parts – the machine going all the way to infinity. Are both really distinct? Yes, but that does not keep them from being inseparable, hence the astonishing theory of the living being (du vivant). That’s it, the status of the living being. [Pause]
Fortunately – good, I prefer going quickly, but still we get the impression of losing it all. Then what? Where are we? Do we even recall where we are in this? Yes we do! — Glittering formula, the light arrives: it will suffice to say that you, each of you, is a dominant monad, and insofar as you are a dominant monad, you have a body. Dominant monad means: you are a reasonable soul, [Pause] and as such, you have a body, with a brain – there is no soul without a brain – you have a body with a brain. Your body is made of what? Of an infinity of actually infinite tiny parts, [Pause] but inseparable from an infinity of dominated monads [Pause] that are themselves not reasonable but animal or sensitive. [Pause] Hence this extraordinary vitalism that can state at the same time: so there is no living matter, no, all matter is matter, that’s all. Simply put, there will be inseparability of the secondary matter and of the tiny souls, that is, of the dominated monads. [Pause] Only, [what] if that were everything? That’s not going to work so easily! For me, in my view, this is one of the greatest organicisms ever created in philosophy. As Whitehead liked to call his philosophy organicist, organicism, this is yet another reason to compare them.
You already see where that leads us if I wanted to save some time. It’s no longer a question of saving time! If I wanted to save time, what is the situation of animals? It’s complicated for animals because although we say that animals do not have a reasonable soul – that they don’t attain necessary truths, they don’t attain infinite series, they don’t do mathematics, they don’t know God, etc. – they nonetheless have a tiny clear portion. [Pause] And while they don’t do reasoning, they register consecutive actions (consécutions), as [Leibniz] says, in their monads. And we saw that psychology of the animal was truly something fundamental for Leibniz. Fine.
“I am dying!” You recall what happens when I die. We have seen it because that good news elated us. [Laughter] We saw it right at the beginning: it’s fabulous, when I die! My reasonable soul is reduced to a sensitive or animal soul, but it remains, it remains. [Pause] It’s the famous folds, pleats, and unfolds, and it will be re-unfolded when God calls it to the last judgment. You recall this very strange idea that it had [Deleuze bursts out laughing] that the souls called to being reasonable were not so from the very start of the world – in fact, this would be idiotic. Me, my reasonable soul, you think, and yours as well, it was indeed necessary that we wait to be born into the order of time, into the order of succession, on the first [upper] floor. God had to call us, that is: unfold our own parts so that we might express the world. But before we existed, we existed as what? As an animal or sensitive soul, as a worm soul. Simply, what was it that distinguished us from a worm ? One couldn’t know the answer in that era. As [Leibniz] says: it’s as if God had issued, in certain sensitive souls, an official document, a document that they were going to achieve reason, etc.[6] In the end, that’s the Leibniz that affects us the most. I stop on that note.
When we die, we again become a sensitive soul belonging to secondary matter. — We have only a tiny effort to make – Let’s take the law of the body: secondary matter and all the tiny dominated monads, what he [Leibniz] most often calls the substantial forms. All substantial forms never cease coming and going. Why? By virtue of the first floor. The law of the first floor, if you recall, [is] the universal interaction of bodies. Our body never ceases changing parts, and not only does it not cease changing organs, but through this, it never ceases changing souls, that is, substantial forms, since substantial forms or tiny souls are strictly inseparable from organs. [Pause] What does something so simple mean: you have a soul of your heart, you have your very own soul, you have your soul, but you have a soul of your heart, you have a soul of your arm, you have a soul of it all? You have millions and millions of souls, but they never cease changing at the same time as the parts of your organism – all that never ceases changing. Leibniz found a metaphor more beautiful than Heraclitus’s river to say everything changes. He says: it’s like Theseus’s boat, that the Greeks always repaired, always a hole, always a hole. That indeed means that in every body, atoms never cease changing.
Comment from a student: From this angle, [Xavier] Bichat spoke of the infinities of partial deaths.
Deleuze: Completely, because… It’s not difficult, to calculate a partial death in Leibniz, and at the same time, how is it that there is no total death? You take an organism, you take your organism at moment a, and here is what you are doing: all the parts of this organism and all the souls of this organism do not depart at the same time. So you have a first time marker, at moment b; let’s say that region a prime subsisted and that region a second has disappeared, and more and more closely. And you wonder: in relation to moment a that you left, at what moment are all the parts renewed? But at that moment, in relation to the preceding moment, nothing prevents a certain number of parts, or rather of non-numerable parts, from still remaining. We can call “period of an organism” a time distance, the time difference in order to renew completely the parts and souls of the organism, once it is said that all this never occurs at once, that it never happens at once, and that, moreover, there is never a moment in which everything is renewed. I start off from moment a, to moment b, I can say — I am saying anything at all: ten molecules have gone, to moment c, twenty molecules have gone. But ten new ones have arrived, and these remain. So that is one period. — I see your fading and beaten gaze; well, that’s understandable. –Your [organism] period never coincides with a disappearance or a total birth. It is always straddling one part that remains and another part that is departing.
But how do we conjugate, simultaneously, it’s my body and it never ceases leaving? And in the end, Leibniz has a lot of difficulty, and if I try to summarize, I again stumble onto something that we began to discuss the last time. Yes, we must maintain the following two things: what is going to define a body, with its escapes and returns, with its new provisions (fournitures) and its new departures: what is going to define a body as my own, it’s — excuse the expression – it’s a seam (couture), a kind of seam or knot, a link, that Leibniz calls the vinculum. [Pause] What corresponds to my dominant monad is a vinculum that links the dominated monads with the organs.[7] [Pause]
How did he conceive of this vinculum? This vinculum is called substantial, that is, depending directly on the substance. [Pause] It belongs to me, dominant monad; it’s in the Letters to Des Bosses, it’s to me that it belongs — the texts are very, very difficult; I am only giving you an outline, although they have been very well interpreted, on one hand, by [Yvon] Belaval in his Introduction to Leibniz’s Thought, and on the other hand, by a philosopher named Christiane Frémont who published the Letters to Des Bosses,[8] that still does not keep this text from being quite difficult. — I am saying, it seems to me that the vinculum belongs to me as dominant monad. In this regard, all the organs and dominated monads that compose my organism, and that come and go, that is, arrive and leave, do not depend on the vinculum. They belong to me insofar as they enter in, but they leave and they take another vinculum, or else they do not take any vinculum at all. And that’s what will produce the universal interaction of bodies. [Pause]
So fine, let’s try to see this. — I am speaking very quickly. All this is already quite difficult. — I am trying to create an organizational structure; that’s all very fine, you might say: try to create a structure of the great categories that you were just talking about.[9] I would reply:
First: events, [Pause] intrinsic singularities, inflections.
Second: monads, [Pause] active primitive forces [Pause] that express the world or fold events. [Pause] It’s the actuality of the world. [Pause]
Third: the monads not only have an active primitive force, but a passive primitive force; it is their finitude, or their primary matter, as a function of which they only express [Pause] a finite portion of the world. They only express clearly a finite portion of the world.
Fourth: if I only express a finite portion of the world, I have a body, which is the same as saying: if I have a primary matter, it expresses a requirement (exigence): requirement of having a body.
Fifth, the body is the third form of the infinite, [Pause] the actually infinite aggregate of infinitely tiny and non-enumerable parts. [Pause] In this regard, it is secondary matter [Pause] and remains inseparable from an infinity of derived monads, of sub-monads of derived monads or substantial forms that are dominated souls in rapport with my dominant soul.
Fifth or sixth [Several students say, Sixth] – Oh, it’s clear, it’s quite ok, you cannot do any more… — Sixth, two aspects. [Pause] The secondary matter belongs to me, belongs to my monad inasmuch as it enters under the vinculum, the chain, the substantial chain that belongs to me or that characterizes me. In this, I draw greatly from the text [the Letters to] Des Bosses: the vinculum belongs to me and is fixed, is connected to the dominant monad. — [Deleuze perhaps reacts to someone who wishes to interrupt him] I am continuing what I am saying because otherwise, I’ll no longer understand anything. – On the other hand, the same ones, that is, the organic parts and the dominated monads, never cease coming and going, like Theseus’s boat, according to whether they change to another vinculum, pass to another monad, or free themselves from any vinculum. [Pause]
Seventh : in any event, one gets situated here [Laughter] since, [Pause] at death, — there is a problem in this, you know, since he didn’t want, he doesn’t want, [Leibniz] already created such a beautiful theory of damnation, so we can’t expect everything from him; he didn’t want to arrange one with the other, the problem of death and the problem of the organism, I believe. – For when we die, once again, we lose our reasonable soul that again becomes a sensitive soul, so it loses its vinculum. Does it lose its vinculum? If it loses its vinculum, everything is lost: how will one recognize the body that belongs to us? You get it? Oh, the problem is terrible [Deleuze laughs]. Fortunately there is this strange text: before we are called to become reasonable, and once dead, when we cease being reasonable, there is this strange thing: the official act (l’appel scellé). My soul has again become animal, but it contains the official act, and in my opinion, this is the only way for God to recognize his own, otherwise he could not recognize them. Unless one has to resort to a mystery, and as at the end, [Leibniz] says in the correspondence with Des Bosses, it’s the mystery of transubstantiation: “this is my body, this is my blood.” It’s an example in which monads, dominated monads – for it isn’t Christ’s monad — the dominated monads are monads of the body and blood of Christ, and then the monads of bread and wine that enter into a strange relation.
Final point – It doesn’t matter. We’ve done all we could. – Final point – But I would say, to satisfy everyone, on this point, we haven’t yet completely finished, right? Have a bit more courage in this.
Final point, I am saying: well, you understand… euh, what should you understand? — Yes, our program from the start of the year is almost done, specifically: the soul is full of folds that it partially unfolds. So this was the first Baroque proposition: the folds in the soul. It unfolds them partially, something we saw it through the operations for seeking the truth, etc. Second proposition: matter is full of pleats, [Pause] and it’s the other floor. Matter is full of pleats that shelter, liberate and cause to circulate infinities of actual parts and infinities of dominated monads inseparable from actual parts. [Pause]
Upstairs, in the events, there were singularities. Down below, if we had the time, we would see that in Leibniz’s physics, a physics of extrema, minima and maxima, is going to develop, and in fact, in certain conditions, which are those of the physical world, singular points – but these are things that we would have had to consider [with] physics – singular points become minima and maxima, extrema. What is there between the two? There is this whole story of organisms; there is the whole story of vitalism that causes us to pass perpetually from one floor to the other. [Pause] What can we conclude about this? … Yes?
Question from a student: That makes me think of Bergson because that helps us understand the problem of difference between qualitative and quantitative multiplicities. One could say that the qualitative multiplicity is at the intersection of two infinite lines. These infinites would be the infinite of self and the [inaudible] infinite. What I am wondering… I can give an example: what most appeals to me is to arrive at considering space, or what he calls extension, under the category of something purely qualitative. Could we say that a qualified space — that there is something that occurs — is at the intersection of two infinites, an infinity which is that of the body in movement, at that point, it’s the infinities of infinitely tiny actual parts, and the other infinite line, that would be light (lumière) which is a non-enumerable?
Deleuze: Yeah. I am going to tell you because I prefer the way in which you ended [the question] to the way that you began, because you are as sensitive as I am to the danger of creating comparisons. As concerns the problem of multiplicities, which is, in fact, a fundamental problem, we can say this generally: in my view, Bergson comes at a crucial moment in the theory of multiplicities and is going to attempt a powerful move in order to cause it [the theory] to emerge from the stage of mathematics. There are two authors who simultaneously undertake this move to cause multiplicity to emerge from the simple stage of the theory of mathematics in order to introduce it into philosophy: it’s Husserl and it’s Bergson. That’s a first point. What interests Bergson is a particular point: the rapport between discrete multiplicities and continuous multiplicities. Fine. Is he interested? Yes, he’s interested in the problem of the one and the multiple. Yes, since yet again, there is no one and multiple, there are only multiplicities, and it’s through this that he is profoundly modern. There is no longer one and multiple; the question of the one and the multiple is not longer posed in philosophy, etc.
I would say for Leibniz, to avoid confusion, there is something missing in Bergson and that exists in Leibniz, and something missing in Leibniz and that exists in Bergson – that’s why philosophy is so beautiful. What is missing in Leibniz is the suppression of the problem of the one and the multiple. He will continue to think – he’s a man of the seventeenth century – he continues to think in terms of a one and a multiple. Moreover, with his conception of harmony, you have multiples-to-multiples rapports, but the multiples-to-multiples rapports are fundamentally calibrated to multiples-one rapports, in Leibniz. On the other hand, you have in Leibniz an attempt and an exploration of types of multiplicities in all the senses that here go beyond, that do not at all correspond to the Bergsonian situation. So if I attempted the three, specifically the three simplest ones, it already is not some multiples, the three infinities; it’s only two of them: the multiplicity of monads and the multiplicity of bodies.
So this is marvelous because you are giving me our ending. All I need to say is, but yes, just consider: what does Leibniz call harmony?[10] What does he call harmony? What he calls harmony is two things: all monads express the same world, but [Pause] this world only exists in the monads; they have no doors or windows, they have no communication, they exert no action on each other. Each monad has only internal actions, each monad acts on itself, in relation to its predicates; no monad acts on another one. They are closed off, and they simple express the same world. One might say that between the monads, there is no direct action, but there is a harmony. Still they must have expressed the same world once we admit that this world does not exist outside them. Harmony will be precisely this. There would be no harmony if they expressed a same world that existed outside them.
If a world is supposed to exist between all of us and we were in harmony, there would be no problem – what I see face on, you see from behind, period, point made. But that’s not how it is. The world does not exist outside monads; henceforth, in order for this to be the same world, monads have to be in harmony with one another. As [Leibniz] says: it’s the proof of God’s existence. If there were no God, you expressing the same world would be excluded, or else the common world would really have to exist. But if it is true that the world is uniquely the virtuality that only gains actuality in each monad that expresses it, the world is nothing other than the pre-established harmony of monads among themselves. It’s as if God had synched all the clocks with each other – understand the abominable misunderstanding it would be to believe that this means: everyone is on the same time; on the contrary, that means that when it’s 1:05 for me, there is someone who is at 1:10, and that between the two forces of expression, there is linkage. That’s the pre-established harmony of substances between them or monads. [Pause]
But, second point — you understand this; it’s essential. I don’t know what more to say for this to be concrete — [Pause] I am leaving, you are staying. [Pause] If there’s a hole, it’s like a mirage, and if there is nothing in this hole, this universe hole (trou d’univers), there is no pre-established harmony. There must be a connection between what ends in a monad and what begins in another. So the connection is not direct since monads do not act upon each other. Thus, there is pre-established harmony of monads between themselves. All of them unfold in the same world although they do not communicate with each other, although none communicates with another.
But then, — a final effort… final effort… This is some Leibniz in a rush. A final effort, that makes me think of the galloping visit through the Louvre in Godard [in Bande à part]. Final effort and here we go. – You remember? But, what is my body if not the shadow that you cast over me? The pre-established harmony, suddenly, is the harmony of souls and body, and in what way? [It’s] not only insofar as it would be insufficient, not only insofar as they obey different laws, [Pause] and, above all, insofar as they have different natures. For, and it’s one of the most fundamental points in Leibniz, [there is] the critique he makes of certain disciples of Descartes, notably Malebranche and other Cartesians. [Pause]– So there, really, fast, fast, fast. — I say: there is nonetheless something odd in our reflection, that often we are told that philosophy has considered causes and that science imposed the sole idea that was truly scientific and which was [the idea] of laws. And it’s not true, these are things one must not believe. The notion of law came into being in the seventeenth century, and in the seventeenth century, it did so in the most theological systems in the world. In Auguste Comte, there is something that does not work well when he says that the cause is metaphysical – he meant something else, but it doesn’t matter. Taken literally, Comte is truly catastrophic: one must not say cause is metaphysics and that science arrives with the idea of law, because those who first discovered and constituted a veritable concept of laws were the Cartesians. Why? Because God alone being the cause, Nature is ruled by laws. They are the ones that hoisted up a concept of laws defined essentially by generality and — I am going fast, but still this is inadequate – but, principally by generality, and thus distinguishing miracle and law, miracle referring to particular desires (volontés) of God, and generality referring to general desires of God. God operates through general will, which will be Malebranche’s entire theory, called occasionalism. No matter. [Pause]
And here is Leibniz’s objection. I don’t mean that he’s right, because it’s a huge discussion between Malebranche and Leibniz, and Leibniz’s objection seems splendid to me. He says: fine, whatever you want, God operates through general laws, with one condition: it’s that bodies, or souls, [Break in the Web Deleuze recording] that is, the terms that connect to general laws, must be capable of doing so. Malebranche’s project, if you will, is the so-called occasionalist project. Malebranche’s project: one must have an occasion, set by God, without degrees, right? It’s an occasion like another. – [Deleuze pauses a moment, saying: Oh, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la] – It’s the occasion, general law, liquid’s passage of steam, transformation of liquid into steam, which gives us the law, water boils at 212 degrees, you see? It’s the analysis between an occasion and a general relation. Or else, in all the theories of laws of movement, you have shock and the occasion. Shock is an occasion, the shock of two bodies is an occasion, and the general law is the transformation of movement, the transformation of movement between the body that shocks and the shocked body, although the shock itself is the immobile body. It’s precisely through this that there’s an occasion. So this is the passage from one moment to the other. You understand? This will be, for example, the example that, applied to the soul and to the body, will be called occasionalist.
I find that Leibniz has an astonishing reply… [Brief interruption of the BNF recording, then return] But what interiority enters into a body, [Pause] and at the extreme, what interiority into a soul? [Return to the Web Deleuze recording and text] Leibniz was able to show us that there was an interiority in the body, and that the interiority in the body was force. And Malebranche is embarrassed since it was force in the sense of motor force (force motrice), or work, something that Malebranche and Descartes, that Malebranche coming after Descartes knew nothing about. So [Malebranche] could conceive of a definition of the body as a function of exteriority. But Leibniz arrives and says: but by virtue of modern science – it’s Leibniz’s whole theme – you know, in the end he tells them: I really don’t want to toss Aristotle in your faces, I don’t really want to resuscitate Aristotle, whereas you believe that you are done with Aristotle, but in the name of modern science, [Leibniz] says, I must repeat to you: do not believe that Nature has lost all interiority. For a body to observe a law, there must still exist an interior Nature that makes this observation possible and necessary. What does that mean? Water boils at 212 degrees, fine, you haven’t said anything; you will have satisfied yourself with an extrinsic discourse, as he says, if you do not find in the interior nature of water, [Pause] why these 212 degrees? [Pause] That is, why does what you call “occasion” precisely make possible this transformation? You will tell me why, but science stopped doing so a long time ago. Not at all. There is a whole series of phases of transformative states, and all this leads you towards a qualitative physics that was present in Aristotle, that Descartes completely missed, and that Leibniz goes on to reconstitute as a new physics – it’s not at all a “return to Aristotle” – but is like reprising Aristotle based on new data.
So, I mean, pre-established harmony, on one hand, will be the harmony of monads among themselves, the harmony of souls between themselves, on one hand, and on the other hand, the harmony of souls with bodies, that is, in the way bodies themselves include an interiority that might place them in harmony with the interiority of souls. That is, it is not enough that bodies be governed by a regime of interaction; a dynamic interiority is also necessary, a force of bodies that might be in harmonic rapport with souls as primitive forces, the forces of bodies in harmonic rapport and that, however, are forces of bodies. Work, mobilized action, is what he will call derivative forces, in distinction from forces of souls that are primitive forces.
So next time, that’s what I would like to do, [consider] this precise point of harmony: how Leibniz, to have us understand this, precisely needed a concept of harmony, and the question: does this concept of harmony owe something, henceforth, to music? But, don’t forget at least this theme of harmony; it must guide you. The hypothesis I am proposing to you is that in every sense of harmony as we have just seen it, in all the senses in Leibniz, harmony presents itself under this double aspect: first, the expressed does not exist outside the expresser, and you will see that this works at each stage. Second, the expresser exists only through a regulated correspondence with the expressed. At that point begins a kind of Baroque music that accompanies Baroque philosophy.
I thank you, and until next week.

Lecture 20, 2 June 1987: Course on Harmony, including Students’ Interventions
I have the feeling that some of you, judging only from all this equipment, are here for a final course. I would like to tell you something about final courses: final courses always happen, but not always at the moment that one thinks. Final courses have always already happened. The final course was the previous course or the time before that.
So, today’s session is not at all a final course. Today, it’s something completely different. And I had indicated to you that I was hoping that we would gather together, a certain number among you who have participated in this course this year or worked together, in order to initiate some new research directions as a function of what we have done this year. And on this topic, what I was expecting is for some of you who are particularly competent, in my view, to speak, and for me to say nothing at all. [Laughter] I will just ask questions. I’ve already done my final course. So this is how with these lights, I don’t know where you’re going to put them… [Deleuze refers to the film crew] I don’t see very well… This will be a silent movie! [Laughter] So, this is perfect because I see that we agree entirely, but don’t count on me for a final course with these lights… Final courses are continually ruined. A final course is not filmed!… It has always happened yesterday,… or never.
Fine. So, what is this thematic reflection (relance) that I wanted all about? Some among you had graciously accepted the following principle: we have spent a year on this very strange, engaging author, Leibniz, and then this theme of harmony constantly was floating about, the harmony of souls between themselves, the harmony of souls and bodies, etc.; and then we noticed each time in passing that this is quite interesting because harmony, harmony, harmony – connecting harmony to the soul, we could create an entire history of philosophy from this. It’s well known that from the side of Pythagoras, from Plato, harmony, the soul, are not without relations. But we would say, no, that’s not it. We would say that there’s something else: we would say that with Leibniz, it’s nonetheless curious because harmony, we assumed, must be in the process of taking on a transformative sense (sens tournant). Immediately, something that has always been our method while working together, something reached out to invite us in: what reached out to us was music because, after all, in the same period, something was happening that especially resembled the unfolding of an entirely new notion of harmony.
Is it therefore the case once again that in one of the most creative of philosophies and in one of the most creative of musical movements something was not going to resonate, without copying each other or applying to each other? But when Leibniz sought to liberate harmony from certain notions with which it had been confused up to then; and when musicians were going to discovery harmony by liberating it, let’s say –  I speak very grossly – liberating it from certain attachments of counterpoint, aren’t there things here important for us?
And [I am] also adding, before I can cease speaking, precisely that our method has deliberately been a bit monstrous. I mean – when I have spoken about this to some here on whom I particularly rely to help us, they gave a first reaction that was not entirely favorable – this was something monstrous there, at first glance, it was that this requires [us] henceforth to listen to some music. I would like you to understand, and you won’t have any trouble because this has always been our method, and since we will be working together, you will be less surprised. But I dream of a reversal of a certain method; this is philosophy becoming illustrative of something else. I make no claim for pieces, for example, musical examples that would have us understand what occurs in harmony. I make a claim precisely for the opposite: there are, for example, in Leibniz some philosophical examples that will help you understand, perhaps, what occurs in music. Those who worked with me on cinema may recall that never did we use a cinematographic example. To the contrary, it was philosophy that needed to serve us as an example for concepts of cinema. It’s this reversal of examples that appears important to me, and therefore we are going to speak about music without hearing a single musical piece.
On the other hand, those here who will derive something from this last session, they’ll go listen to some music, but I also believe they’ll go listen to some Leibniz and will receive from Leibniz a certain musical understanding, and not only philosophical. I always am pleading for the necessity of a double reading of great philosophers who must be read philosophically, of course, if one can, but if you might not have the philosophical background to read a great philosopher, you always have perfectly the aesthetic culture, and there are musical readings, there are pictorial readings of great philosophers, or affective readings of great philosophers. It’s not that you would lose nothing; you would then lose the purely conceptual aspect, but something very deep which is philosophy itself will remain. But there still is an affective reading of Spinoza that has always coexisted with a conceptual reading. There is a musical reading of Leibniz that coexists with his conceptual reading.
Hence my invitation to several of you because I was saying… Ok, I am really stating some extremely surface remarks… Let’s assume [that] this period [is] a period in which harmony changes its status, with what we call harmony tending to change and undergo a mutation. Let’s assume that, for example, harmony is no longer defined by intervals, [Pause] but it’s defined by accords. Harmony would be defined by accords. Then perhaps an entirely new manner of treating dissonances would be opened; [Pause] an entirely new domain of inner components of sound would be deepened. [Pause] The discovery of a certain tonality under the theme of tonal centers and centers of attraction would occur. A whole group appears here, harmony referring to accords, the organization of tonalities of center, or centers of attraction. Fine, it’s on this first point that I have asked two of you who have worked with us this year to bring a little clarity to the topic, because the question for us is: does this new harmony, for example, that refers to accords and no longer exactly to intervals, is this new harmony described as possessing a fundamental characteristic of baroque music? Isn’t this what Leibniz, in a different way, is undertaking? And when he speaks to us of the harmony of soul and body, he defines it through accords, which is something absolutely new philosophically, and no longer by what? No longer by intervals or by influences. And when Leibniz tells us that he distinguishes three means of conceiving the relation of soul and body — influence, assistance, and consentment – doesn’t he circle around notions that are much more musical than we might have first believed? [Pause] [There is] influence, referring to melody for reasons that would require me to do a course, were I to feel more confident  on the matter; [there is] assistance, referring to a certain type of counterpoint and to an evolution of counterpoint; and [there is] consentment, appealing then to a new conception of accord and of accords.
But finally, it’s on this that I would like… I asked Pascale Criton and [Vincent] Valls [First name appears later in the session] to unravel this history of Baroque music a bit as regards this mutation of harmony. And we would almost have to say… Well yes, you are speaking to philosophers, to people who don’t know music, and you are going to help them grasp a musical concept. [To Pascale Criton] You can proceed as you wish, and if I have something to ask, I will.
[Pascale Criton begins to speak][2] [13:00-18:50]
Deleuze: Excuse me, can I ask a question? Just one question. What strikes me, if I understand well, you are in the process of telling us about the condition through which harmony is discovered and is defined through the accord, and not through the interval. It’s first a new regime of voices. [PC: Yes] and not the reverse, is this right? [PC: No, that is…] This is what I would like for you to better indicate, that is, there wouldn’t be determinable harmony through the accord if we passed through the new regime of voices.[3]
PC: There were indeed accords ; there was a notion of accord… It’s a vertical accord that would locate the group (ensemble) of voices. [Deleuze: That’s it, yes.] Whereas it’s no longer… It’s what regulated the aggregate of voices. So here, we pass into a phenomenon… It’s small texts that are located in the Florentine Camerata, in Montiverdi, and others from the period, that greatly supported the singers’ abilities. That is, these are singers who discovered this way of creating and invented with the composers… That is,  a continuous, constant and deliberate encounter took place, a very close collaboration between poets, lyric poets like Petrarch… no, not Petrarch… Tasso… finally, there were several, [Ottavio] Rinuccini, singers with composers. [Jump in film editing]
Deleuze: I need to say that your question is important to me because either we say – and this seems to be your opinion – either we say, well fine, there is a new regime of voices, and it’s this regime of voices that made possible the new emergence, the emergence of a new harmony determinable as accord; [Pause] or one might say – which would suit me better, but if it’s wrong, if it’s not possible to say, well, too bad, it’s not a problem – or what would suit me better is to say that, you understand, they were coming into an ageless turning point of Renaissance already entering into a struggle or conflict of two possible directions that ordinarily we call, speaking vulgarly, the horizontal and the vertical. Melody is horizontal by nature, is called horizontal, and harmony with accords, the accords between sounds, implying a vertical control crossing over several horizontal lines.
And then, I jump over to a very different aspect. There is one thing, my horizontal pathway of melodic music, my vertical construction of accords; here eventually harmony will only be defined by the accord when the vertical line acquires, for various reasons, a kind of autonomy. Look then at the history of music – and I emphasize that what we are doing here is not history of music – which will pose the real problem, that there has always been in music, always the diagonals that existed as accords, like in painting, like everywhere… So all of that was very abstract. [Jump in film editing, no sound track interruption]
But a second point: so there was a great musical problem in general, putting into play the concept, specifically of horizontal melody and vertical harmony, and their diagonal combination. And there is a completely different problem: that music has always been an assemblage, a machinery, and creating music is arranging (machiner) voices and instruments, and instruments with voices, and that the instruments-voices machinery, the voices-instruments assemblage, has always had very, very important variations. And that… So here, I come back to Pascale’s first topic. Yes, in counterpoint, voices and instruments are strictly – something that already represents developments of genius, understand? This isn’t at all negative – are in a certain way interchangeable. What does interchangeable mean? Anyway, I am speaking quickly; you who know the material will correct me… I already notice your very severe gaze, and that bothers me a little. [Deleuze indicates Pascale Criton] I suppose…
And then, with the beginning of Baroque music, on the other hand, here I return, no, rather I refer to what Pascale just said [Deleuze speaks directly to Pascale Criton]. There are very strong differences in nature between voices, hence the importance of continuous bass, right? This whole history of bass and high notes, but there are going to be new relations between voices-instruments that will then engender a kind of machination between voices, and between voices and instruments that is entirely different [Pause] such that, so there we are, just my comment that… By causing harmony-accords rather to depend on the history of voices, couldn’t one consider that is like having two sides?
Richard Pinhas: I have a question, I must say… It’s very important. Ok. While I emphasize that all Pascale said is absolutely correct, it seems to me there are… It’s nonetheless important; there’s a kind of reversal that could be established, notably that the modification is internal to the musical machine and secondarily, not that this would be less important, but just as important, but secondarily, reaching the level of voices, that is, it’s after the fact that voices are going to be transformed. What happens with the passage from Classical music in that era into the Baroque, which is a revolutionary act and that is marked by very, very specific steps? I am trying to name them, principally Montiverdi, [Dieterich] Buxtehude and Bach, given that they are witnessing something that will be the “music of spheres”, that is, a music that is really going to be a music of pre-established harmony, universal harmony, demanded as such by the musicians, with the result that – this is yet another parenthesis within a parenthesis – there is a parallel and continuous development of music to the level of what is harmony and philosophy, to the level of what is pre-established harmony in Leibniz.
So what is happening in Baroque music, once we say that this is going to link to a development of voices? But coming after the fact, there’s first the establishment of consonant relations of basses that the usual melodic counterpoints come to complete and replace. We have a floating dominant on the level of tonality, that is, we have the initiation of a tonality that is going to pass from a floating to a fixed dominant. There will be a kind of modulation and continuous variation of tempo, as Pascale said, and there’s a very important term in music, as we saw the last time with Rameau. I am thinking that it’s a term that has a very precise philosophical resonance: we shall see a majorized inflection. So, in general, these are the technical points coming to mark the sound machine itself.
And the most important point on the level of this change that is practically a revolution on the musical level that is fully undertaken starting with Montiverdi and that certainly has repercussions on the level of treatment of voices, but that is fundamentally a change in the musical machine itself, that is, we pass from intervals to a series of accords. There is passage from a nearly pre-Baroque world, incarnated by philosophers like Jakob Böhme or [Marin] Marsenne, to something that is continuity, to a kind of infinite harmony, an infinite continuum incarnated [Deleuze is heard making growling noises] also by Bach in music, and by…
So I am finishing: what is very, very important is what happens to bass consonances, and bass consonances are going to become true referents. And what would be important for you to explain [he addresses Pascale Criton], because I think that you started to earlier, is this: these terms consonance and resonance, that are so important for a musician, they have, I think, their counterpart in philosophy and especially in Leibniz, and these consonances and resonances, that are going to give life to a whole series of harmonics, that are precisely going to be resonance and consonance of accords between each other that give birth to a new world, which is going to be the world of harmony, the world of the music of spheres, the world of pre-established harmony in music. And I think that if you defined a bit what in music is consonance and resonance, if you could manage to explain that, it would be really great, then, once we’ve said that… fine.
Deleuze: So I’m the one who messed everything up by placing… because now, this is getting complicated, at least for me, it’s becoming even more interesting because, you see, everything is happening as if we could say three things [Deleuze looks toward Pinhas]: Pascale was saying in her presentation, she was telling us: be very aware that something new emerges at the level of voices, and that it’s this difference that explodes on the level of voices, that was not encompassed in the preceding music, in the music of the Renaissance. It’s this difference that will make possible harmony by accord. I intervened then rather timidly by saying that it would suit me better – one can always try – it would suit me better if for the moment, we considered this as two independent variables. On the one hand, for reasons yet to be considered, and that Richard also has just suggested, harmony is defined by accord and not by… the… I cannot recall what… [Students provide an answer] … by interval. And on the other hand, the voice-instruments machinery is not at all produced in the same way. [Jump in film editing]
[The session continues with Pascale Criton speaking, her brief comments barely audible in the audio recordings; Deleuze listens while smoking a cigarette]
PC: … the heritage of written music, of scholarly music. I am not saying [Deleuze: Yes] that instruments do not exist – it would be crazy to say that – but writing for instruments did not exist. [Deleuze: That’s right!] So, we cannot say that voice came afterwards. It’s absolutely…
Deleuze: But we can consider that being a state of a machinery that introduces no difference.
PC: Yes, absolutely. There is an exchange. There is an exchange, but the exchange is nonetheless, during the entire beginning of the Baroque era, very important.
Deleuze: It’s what you earlier called equality… It’s what you yourself called equality.
PC: Yes, but it seems to me that it’s very important to sense what happens at the start of Baroque music because there’s a rupture: it’s the rupture of a world. There is the writing of counterpoint by Buxtehude, for example, but a bit later. This is in Germany, and in Germany, Baroque came very, very late, and they conserved the writing of counterpoint, and they never let go of it…
Deleuze: Agreed. So there is no problem on this. But Richard’s third position was: can we still talk, even to begin by defining, [of] the Baroque contribution of accords? Hence his request to recommence with a definition of consonances and resonances, I believe. [PC: Yes.] To begin by the problem of accords and harmonic resonances, yes?
PC: But dissonances are not harmonic at the start; they are melodic, they are expressive, and it’s the fact that voices express things [Pause]… It’s the fact of such an expressivity of voices that enables chromatics.
Deleuze: This is very interesting, you see, because here, I don’t know if you are correct, but you have rejustified and are maintaining your primary point (primat), with a small difference: you maintain your primary point about voices which, in your view, to understand the problem, one has to start from voices. It’s quite possible… [PC tries to intervene], but I want to emphasize…
PC: But instruments are employed to imitate voices in that period.
RP: Can I make a comment? It’s that…
PC: Whereas the instrumental notations are “col contare”, [Deleuze: Yes!] as the voices [do], etc. All these imitations of…
Deleuze: Here you have a very specific historical argument…
RP: Only one thing, and it’s not at all a negation in relation to what Pascale said, but rather a confirmation. It’s that chromatics is, effectively, one of the fundamental components that’s going to enter into the construction of Baroque music. And this kind of generalization in the more open chromatics in relation to what is going to developed subsequently, but it’s very, very important because it’s a kind of reversal in music. Besides, if we are speaking about a turned-back chromatics also in Montiverdi, it’s a chromatics that is fully born with Montiverdi, that fully belongs to his style and is applied to music itself, and after the fact or at the same time, but it’s by inference, and nearly by deference that it is going to be applied to voices. The only thing that shocks me a bit, finally, that bothers me a bit, is in saying that music did not exist before the Baroque, and that everything is overdetermined by voices.
Deleuze: Let’s leave that… Let’s leave that, because what interests me is the difference of the two positions, but I feel already that there is no conflict. [To Pascale] You do support, in fact… It would be nice to know why you maintain this, because this interests me with reference to Leibniz.
PC: Because in counterpoint, everything is dissonant – and again, I hope you understand me; I am dropping a lot for everyone’s benefit – at the Renaissance period, they emphasized resonance, the principles of resonance that are the primary resonances of sound. And the principle, it isn’t… it’s governed… attention is paid, in fact, to voices being superposed while respecting resonance.
RP: Can you explain a bit what your [understanding of] resonance is because it’s important for everyone.
PC: Yes, but what will interest us more is consonance. Resonance…
Deleuze: Yes, yes [Deleuze intervenes to reorient the discussion] Continue… I don’t think you need to explain it. No, just continue… Consonance, resonance, I assume we will get there [after]… Continue by just using the terms…
PC: And in the writing of counterpoint that governs the unit of resonance, the dissonances are readied, that is, there is an entire game of writing of counterpoint. It’s movement. Why are voices always left in the air, [in] a space between each other?
Deleuze: This is a wonderful opening to say that. You are completely correct. And I don’t need to make… This is a raw application. What must we retain about pre-established harmony in Leibniz? It’s a opening of the famous “the best of possible worlds,” it’s a wonderful opening toward dissonances. It’s the art of dissonance.
PC: There you are. What I would like to add: is when I say voice, when I speak of counterpoint and I say voice, I am not necessarily saying singing voice. We say voice in music, that is, the conduct of voices that are instrumental and vocal. We call that “a voice.” I would like to emphasize that with voice, I don’t mean “singing voice.”
Deleuze: Of course, of course, of course,… I wanted… So here we are… I am reading from a classic book on Baroque music: “Whereas harmony by interval from the Renaissance only allowed perfect chords and sixth chords, other combinations being founded on delays (retards), the polarity between bass and soprano,” and this supports what you are saying, “opens the door to new harmonic possibilities that, for experts of the period, seems to be the start of chaos.”[4] That is, it’s dissonances, it’s the world of dissonances. So there we see a little something before you come back to… You, you, [Deleuze speaks to Vincent Valls] how do you see the questions in relation to what she has said… I can say quite differently that…
Vincent Valls: I agree fundamentally with Pascale. So I have very little to add. [Pause] I think that there is something fundamental, it’s that music, Franco-Flemish polyphony is also above all a holy music that refused expressivity, in my view, and it’s this desire to cause the expression of feelings to enter into the music that is going to pass through the accompanied melody and use of chromatics of certain formulae. [Pause] I also think that there is a relation in the text and the voice…
Deleuze: [Pause] Right… Here you can ask… and perhaps the question is premature because I am not at all confident about what I’m say, that’s obvious. When you say, both of you, before… [Pause] There weren’t any…, that simplifies… There wasn’t any expressivity, I would tend to think rather that the Baroque discovery of harmony had founded an entirely new expressivity, and that it’s this new expressivity that was going to cause a scandal. Because, before, there certainly was an expressivity. Music was perfectly expressive, and it seems to me that it’s confirmed by all those – let’s call them this to make it easier – all those reactionaries at the time of Baroque music, all of them who wanted to go backwards, and who had as principal theme “the Baroque, or discovery of accords, harmony through accords,” tossed expressivity into the air. The true expressivity, was what? For them, it was inflection. It was melodic inflection, but it’s presented as the sole expressivity. So, for example, I take an author who, musically, was in fact well behind in his era, Rousseau. His position against Baroque harmony, Rousseau’s position against Baroque harmony, is eternally… But… You kill expressivity. Expressivity isn’t dependent on accords. What they found fault in Baroque music especially was for much more, to have pretended – and this is what interests me as regards Leibniz – it’s to have pretended to make expressivity depend on accords. And we indeed see what they mean. How do you have the expressive emerge from an accord of sounds? [Pause, then addressing Pascale Criton] That’s not it?
PC: That’s not it. It’s the opposite.
RP: I would like just to add a small comment… Wait, just a small comment…[5] For the people [here] who are unfamiliar, it might be necessary to give them access to how people were listening to music at the start of the [twentieth] century, the Pierrot lunaire by Schoenberg. The inflection of the recitative, it’s exactly what happens in Montiverdi’s compositions.[6] What happens is that there’s a kind of radical twisting that is inflicted, on one hand, to the text, and on the other hand, to the major melodic line and to the continuous lines. And there, in the same inflection in another register, it’s exactly the same thing with the appearance of the major works by Schoenberg.
But the principal thing that I wanted to say [is] that, perhaps beyond what has been said about expressivity, on the harmonic change itself, although the problem of harmonic souls becomes preponderant, and I insist on this, the fact that there is a fixed dominant in the place of the floating dominant, I believe is a very, very important point. We return into a world with the Baroque music of simultaneity, and effectively we pass into a world of the vertical, that is, there is a complete shift of axis. And from this is a revolution is embodied, and in total resonance we link up to Leibniz’s contribution because it seems to me that Leibniz’s philosophy is the opening, the entry into a world of simultaneity.
Vincent Valls: What’s also there… The fixed dominant assumes a unity of scale, and that comes later. The unified scale does not exist at the time of Montiverdi. You have to wait nearly a century, [Deleuze : Yes.] and that will vary according to the country. The unification of scale will develop much more quickly in Germany. Bach writes in an entirely unified scale, including minor tones, with the three minor tones eventually able to be superposed. Whereas at the same period in France, the minor mode still fluctuates more ; it is not yet completely unified. But I would even tend to say that composers like Montiverdi are not seeking this unification because that allows them precisely so much to play on the ambiguity, to play on both levels (tableaux), [Deleuze : Of course] and this is what can be heard quite well in a work that is very important for me, Montiverdi’s Orfeo, because there we find this radical difference between the pastoral scenes that are not yet tonal, but we see what initiates a relation of scale, thus a tonic dominant relation that assumes in all the recitative parts other works or Orfeo itself which are much more modal and are opposed. That allows them [composers] to play (on the levels) and to have, on one hand, a harmony derived from dance music that is pastoral music, and on the other hand, to have a kind of wandering that allows them to express and to oppose two sentiments.
Deleuze: In this, I follow you entirely, but in my view, we only have one problem in this regard. If you mean that such mutation occurs over long periods of time, this is true not only for music, but also for philosophy. That is, for example, we cannot say that “with Leibniz, this phase takes place.” He is still playing… there are certain elements from Cartesianism that continue, and certain elements from the Renaissance that continue, and he plays with all that. And what you are saying about a musician, is also true for a philosopher, is also true for a painter. In my view that does not prevent there being what we can call “rigors of the concept,” the concept not saying, “from this moment on, there’s this”, but the concept precisely giving values to the seeds of innovation that are still at work in the former, how they are going to precipitate, break loose, etc. Here we are… Of course, we must add that all the time markers that you…
PC: However, this is important because the bipolarity of bass and melody remain; these are new relations. That is, there are forces, new forces that enter into play, and these forces, they are… somewhat the accords that were applied to support the instrumental or vocal play; they become functional little by little; they enter into this new rapport that is that of alternate form, opposed form, dialogue, responses from group to group, levels that communicate with one another. [Deleuze: Yes?] This is how little by little the accords have rapports of tension, rapports of force. So there is an essential rapport that is born which is the rapport of the fifth, [Deleuze: Yes!] that will be determinant for the construction of the system of consonances. The fifth is a… When a sound is made to resonate, there is therefore a series of harmonics, which is the stronger harmonic than the harmonic that returns most often, and which is the most determinant factor for the identity of sound.
Deleuze: But here, excuse me, but could you quickly just give me a general idea, for everyone, this list of accords ?
PC: There is an accord in the sound, yes.
Deleuze: Dominant, tonic… what would the order be? … Intertonals…
PC: What you need to understand is that the sound is an accord in itself. The sound is an accord. We construct the scale by flattening (couchant) the accord that is in the resonance of the sound. [Deleuze : Good !] This is something that is simultaneous and flattend, that is, returned to the horizontal, and that gives points that constitute the tonal scale, the scale of a tonic. And this is a relation of parentage that is created in a tension. And this tension is continued by the harmonic that is the fifth, that is the third harmonic. [Deleuze: So there is a tonic center already…] Yes, there is a tonic center that is a point X, a point where we take a sound and say that this sound characterizes…
Deleuze: And then there are harmonics… [PC: That’s it] I have a tonic center and harmonics. [PC: But every sound… ] What is it that gives me the dominant in this?
PC: The dominant is the fact that when we hear a sound, we don’t assume that it came from nothing; one assumes that it comes from a resonant state and so that it proceeds from another sound. [Deleuze: Yeh?] A do, a re, a mi, it isn’t given just like that, a priori. It’s generated by something else. [Deleuze: Sub-dominant…] Wait. No, no, no, that’s not it. It’s generated by the fact that, in a sound, the first harmonic is the harmonic that redoubles this sound; that is, we have a do, the harmonic, it’s going to be the do from above, the other octave, which is in a rapport of identity. There is no alterity, that is, this do is going to have the same harmonics, and that won’t open anything; there will be no generation. The first generation is the second important harmonic; it’s the one that will return the most often, but in second importance, let’s say, and that’s going to be the fifth. Bum, baaa… [PC sings two sounds, then laughs] There you have a fifth, and it’s the dominant, the dominant of all sound. It’s the fifth, or dominant… How to express this? It’s the expression of the first alterity of a sound; it’s what is going to generate a cycle, what is going to open the sounds to one another. — Is this ok? — And this is important because it’s here that there is a tension which results in the sounds not being juxtaposed measures, but having a dynamic rapport with one another, a rapport in which resonance is conceived as something extremely precise. One cannot just stroll around any which way. And the way in which the first accords of Baroque acted was not yet stressed (tendu), dynamic. And for me — I explain it this way; I believe that certain people feel this in music — there’s a link between the fact that there’s a dramatic tension, an opening of tensions in music, in the pathetic, in the expression proper to Baroque resulting in our needing to find supports in sounds that are going to construct progressions of tension, progressions that are going to become more and more hierarchical, that are going to become functional in relation to one another…. Am I going too quickly?
Deleuze: Excuse me for coming back to my question right away: these discoveries belong…
PC: … to the Baroque, to the cycle of fifths.
Deleuze: To the analysis of the accord, of harmony by accord…
PC: Yes, but that all occurs slowly because, for example, Rameau has a…
Deleuze: Agreed, that happens very slowly under the conditions that …
PC: And it’s very connected to the needs of music, [Deleuze: Right] for expressing things.
Deleuze: Fine, but isn’t this a path precisely in which you could create your explication independently of the problem of voices?
PC: Ehhhhh… [Pause for reflection] I don’t know; no, not really. [Deleuze: Not really…] All authors who have been determinant and have really established the norms [Deleuze: Yes, that interests me] have begun by working with voices. The madrigal is really the form that evolves most quickly and yields the most. [Deleuze: I understand] There is not one madrigalist who didn’t create a madrigal yielding an innovation between the years…
Deleuze: But I can’t say that these voice conditions were a condition for this new organization of harmony by accords?
PC: Wait, can you repeat? The condition of voices was a condition of…
Deleuze:… was a simple condition for the discovery of this harmony by accords and of determinations of this harmony by accords… One second [Deleuze resists being interrupted] My concern is always whether I can separate the two conceptual lines or can’t separate them … [Jump in film editing]
PC: Certainly, you can separate them. [The next comments by PC, approximately 90 seconds, are barely audible]
Deleuze: Yes, that would interest me all the more so since this would then be two lines: philosophically, this would be two different lines in Leibniz that would also converge and intersect…
PC: [Comments still inaudible, another 50 seconds, then return to the film track] Bach uses and reengages (relance) these voices by crossing with fifths all the diatonic degrees. [Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes] There is this notion of cycle and this notion of graduation, of passing… of staging of levels.
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes. I’d just like to make a point very, very quickly here. We realize that… Those who think about Leibniz here are already aware of a small amalgam, that when Leibniz speaks of the accord of souls between each other, we can say, fine, it’s a way of speaking, sort of; there’s the equivalent in Malebranche, in Descartes. There’s the equivalent for lots of philosophers. And yet, perhaps, but perhaps not. Perhaps he already introduces a notion of accords that is not far from what was going on at that very moment, or that happened in music, and that the rapports between monads, such as we have seen them, you know… there’s a principle, dominants, sub-dominants, little matter, but… All that is quite connected to something that is absolutely new to the extent that it’s not as is said, a variant concerning the theories of the union of soul and body in Leibniz. It’s not a variant; it’s something entirely new and that is connected to a new conception of harmony, although he cannot invoke it for the reason stated by Vincent, because it’s a conception of harmony that is being worked out, no doubt, in several domains. It’s being worked out at once in astronomy, in physics, in mathem… [Pause] in music, in philosophy; it’s being worked out over several decades.
And finally, we are making a bit of a step forward. Do you have something to add, Vincent? [Vincent: Not for the moment] Not for the moment. [Deleuze turns toward the blackboard, speaking to Richard Pinhas] And you’d like to…?
RP : No, it’s just a drawing of a table of harmonies so that people might see… When a sound is emitted, fundamentally [Pinhas refers to a drawing he has made on the board[, there are the resonances that arrive through levels, exactly as Pascale explained, that we see in a projected manner. We are able to understand that it happens by the fifth, the third, the seventh, the ninth, etc., once we have stated that the table of harmonies begins through steps. Harmony is a fundamental partial of sound that comes… The terms are very important because the notion of harmony, which for us is fundamental in Leibniz, is fundamental also in music and notably at this period because there is simply, as you said earlier, Pascale, a zone of fusion that occurs between the vertical and the horizontal, and it’s this zone of fusion in which Baroque will be born. So the relation of consonances of accords is as if there were kinds of projections of virtuality. The resonances of the accord, the table of harmonics, are literally the virtualities. We are in a world in which temporality reigns – temporality isn’t a good word – but where simultaneity reigns. Simultaneity is represented first by the sound, and then by the accords, then by the succession of accords, not in their succession, but in their interpenetration, thus on a literally vertical axis. And underneath there will be fundamental sounds, underneath fundamental consonances; there will be a profusion and a proliferation of virtual consonances that are actualized according to the technical means and according to the composer’s modes of realization (effectuation). And it’s these virtualities that we rediscover in the domain of philosophy, and notably… I would say unconscious or nearly unconscious virtualities that are going to be actualized by the composer and that are going to form the new system of consonances. But that is the same as Pascale said…
Deleuze: We come back here… Perfect… Pascale and Vincent reached that point, it seems to me, at the question of consonances.
PC: … It was concerning consonances, the bass lines instead of being attentive to the expressivity of instrumental or vocal melodic voices become constructive of a harmonic universe; that is, the rapport is reversed, that is, in the middle, or end of the Baroque… [Deleuze: Could you repeat…?] … the rapport [Deleuze: What is reversed?] What’s reversed is the bass becoming harmonic to such a particular point, that is… What we just spoke about, that is, what the accords contain becomes what is going… [Pause] what is going to organize a new counterpoint. That is, the counterpoint is resituated, returns, but it is organized in a level (plan) that is more and more architectural through this tension that is created, that has created an architecture, really a tonic architecture of points, of points of rapport and tensions inside vibrations of sounds. Let me explain. — Is this ok? –And so, for example, what we call the bass, then what is called modulating bass or ground bass (basses ‘ostinato’) is a bass that is going to emit all the points through which a music composition is going to evolve and that can even yield the general form of a composition, even a great one like the Passion, Bach’s cantatas. It’s not only the bass line, it’s not only local; it is not going to have a local action, so that at the start of the Baroque, there is a very, very local action, advancing through points, through strokes (touches); it supports certain spots and the rest of the time, it waits, whereas there, fifty years later, it is not longer waiting at all.
Vincent: … is considered “harmonic rhythm” [Deleuze: That’s it. Yes? Pascale: There you are.] Baroque harmony has its rhythm that nearly ignores the rhythms of voices in the direction of the line, and that can have its own rhythm that is equally independent of the rhythm of its bass, because through the play of reversal, there can be a same accord whereas the rhythm of its bass has its own rhythm; there is going to be the rhythm of the harmony that is going to be established. [Deleuze: Yes, yes…]
PC: And this rhythm of harmony that is accelerated, that is rendered dense, I believe finally, we explain that it’s in circumstances where dramatic action had to be more and more sustained – in the end, it’s what musicians clarify – that the bass had to construct pathways, had to construct more and more precise, more and more complex functions. It’s this that… There is nonetheless a rapport with voices that, during the entire start of the Baroque, I don’t know, could not be obliterated. Then, this becomes instrumental because everything carries over into the styles, the concertant instrumental style that is truly the heir of the madrigal practices, of madrigals and of… It’s difficult not to think of voices at the start of the Baroque.
Deleuze: Here you are coming back to… [PC smiles at Deleuze’s reaction] And then, after we learn, we forget!
RP: Perhaps one can say… This is important. I believe, that the expression [is exemplary], that the voices, and it’s quite important, are as if folded. This is the term used in music… [Deleuze: Folded voices, yes, that exists.] They are folded onto the vertical axis; it’s not a metaphor. And it’s exactly what you said [to PC; while RP is speaking, Deleuze also speaks softly, inaudibly, to someone beside him] That is, voices are important, but they undergo a movement of torsion onto the vertical axis. That’s the first thing. The second thing is important in the passage into the Baroque; it’s just a passing remark: when you [to PC] said earlier that there was the harmonic frequency (cadenza harmonique) that arrives, and what does that mean? It’s literally what we call, in modern terms, but somewhere that indeed corresponds also to Leibniz’s philosophy, a placing into continuous variation of the tempo. This, this belongs – properly speaking – to the musical material (matériau) itself. The term “material” is a recent and relatively modern term, and that belongs to the sound matter. [Deleuze: It’s Leibnizian. There’s a continuity.] That’s right. So, therefore, we have a reorganization of material that also passes through the harmonic frequency.
Deleuze: It’s the continuous bass, it’s the continuous bass, and there is the equivalent in Leibniz, that it’s a law — these are points we’ve already presented — it has a fundamental role, it has a fundamental role since there is even a law, the continuity, it’s a law of harmony… [Pause] Yes, very good… Yes… I am already satisfied, and so… What do you… [Deleuze turn toward RP]
RP: Perhaps Pacale could explain a bit to us what happens at the level of material in this change of the sound material itself, as for example, with the appearance of a certain kind of orchestration, for example. They realize that… Fine, let me just give an indication: it’s that there is going to be a very modern phenomenon like stereophony, that is, the bipolar distribution of instruments. So let me find an example: instead of there being an organ in the middle, or on the right, there will be an organ on the left and an organ on the right, and [there is] no writing created for that. It’s the same for other instruments, so a whole pile of things connect to material. And Pascale is correct in insisting: it’s the transformation of classical music at this period into Baroque music that occurs over a century, a century and a half, and it’s the same in philosophy. I mean that this whole kind of mutation occurs over a fairly long period, and so writing takes form over many successive periods. And I think that you could perhaps say something about the organization of this material, once we say that it is fundamental, I think, in the development of this continuity, of this simultaneity that is being born. [Pause as PC considers RP’s statement]
PC: From the start of concertant music, in the instrumental music of Venise, it’s especially in Venise: first there’s the Venetian school, then the school of Bologne, then the French school, then the German school. And all this [happens] over generations that succeed each other. And what is initiated is effectively groups of instruments that represent… It’s tones (timbres); really it’s groups of tones, and what is important is from the fact they are differentiated, there are string [instrument] groups that are opposed to wind instrument groups, each one with “continuo” – each one has its continuous bass – and it’s a formal organization that is really the beginning of all… finally, it’s the principle of variation, of variations in the orchestration. This is where instrumental music is born that yields the orchestra; it’s the birth of the orchestra. [Pause] … Not what you were looking for?
Deleuze: Oh, yes, that suits me perfectly; that suits me perfectly.
PC: You know, I tried to answer you on a stricter level … well, on a rather strictly musical level because I think that it’s up to you to make the connection with Leibniz.
Deleuze: But it’s [about] that guy [Leibniz], and as for me, here, I’m not doing anything more! [Laughter, especially PC] I don’t want to do anything more! I just would like to muse (rêve) about… Let’s muse together about all this: we would have to work together for another year. Well, what would we have discussed in that case? We’d say, that’s right, we’re the ones who can, that’s what we’ll do, because strangely all this really seems perfect to me. It’s not a question of applying complex musical notions to Leibniz. It’s really a question of seeking in Leibniz in what way this idea [occurs], on the one hand, of an accord of souls, [and] on the other hand, a kind of change of direction in which the accord of souls becomes an accord of souls with bodies. This only was possible at the same time a system – a system named by Leibniz as pre-established harmony – this only was possible at the same time to music. To undertake (opérer), in my opinion – which [is] why I insisted on it, that I always tried to reintroduce the independence of two factors, eh? – two correlative moments that constituted Baroque music and that is the discovery of harmony by accords with all the meaning that this revealed to us, that is, the internal components, obviously, the internal components of the resonant body, [Pause], and on the other hand, without this… the other strictly complementary aspect, a new scheme (machination) of voices and instruments, or if you prefer then philosophically, a new scheme of souls and bodies. And what would this mean? What this would mean is it occurs to the extent that each follows its own laws that enter into accord with the other. If you will, it’s the idea of an autonomy of two series that is going to found the correspondence or what Leibniz calls the “consentment”, and this will happen starting with all this… almost, granting absolutely to Leibniz a sound (sonore).
RP: There’s a final point that seems very important to me. [Deleuze: Yes?] It’s in relation to recent musical notions that have a total resonance with Leibniz’s philosophy. These are, on one hand, the synthesizer that is the monad expression, I mean, of a monad. I mean, literally, the monad synthesizer is the extant actualization of the world. And on the other hand, [there is] another term, an apparatus, that is, a technical machine called a harmonizer, and it’s a very, very important apparatus. Why? Because it’s an apparatus that has existed for about a decade now and that [Pierre] Boulez uses in his latest creations over the last four or five years. I would like to create a small schema to explain how this functions because it reveal the virtualities of the musical world that are already completely present in Baroque music and that shows how different worlds that are incarnated by these different virtualities that are consonances, these veritable pluralities, because its millions of harmonic souls that are in resonance and harmonies themselves. There is going to be a kind of ownership, actualization by certain authors, of certain harmonic partials (partielles), and this is going to create a technical world that is very, very… I don’t have the exact term, but I would say modulated, right? Can I create a small drawing to show how this functions?
Deleuze: But, certainly, certainly.
RP: This is really called a harmonizer. So I will explain. [He goes to the board and draws a graph while speaking]
Deleuze: A simplified drawing because that’s very complex.
RP: Starting from the moment a note is emitted, whatever it might be, or an accord, there is first going to be a temporal play on this accord, that is, this accord is deferred a fraction of a second. It is not graspable by the ear, that is, for a thousandth of a second. And a harmonizer generally works with two or more than two voices. So this isn’t something dual. Starting from a unique accord that is already constituted from a plurality of notes and thus consonances, it will give birth to a plurality of voices. And this machine, that we can situate here, is going to process this accord in a way that causes chords pre-established to resonate by the composer and that can vary from one to the other. I will give two examples of this, but we could imagine many. So technically, this happens through a time lag that is not perceptible to the ear because it’s a lag on the order of a hundredth or a thousandth of seconds, called a “delay” in English. And from this accord, I am going to be able to have, for example, here a fifth and there a third – it’s the same for a note – so I can have consonances of consonances. And this world, which is world of possible virtualities, obviously a world of actualizable virtuality, is actualizable according to the desire… according to the laws of composition that the composer will have applied. So these are in themselves ghosts of sounds, but that are going to be able to be actualized at one moment or another in a way of coming to resonate between here and here [RP points to his drawing], on a plane that is virtual and that passes into actuality through the operation of the machine and the desires of the composer, or that is going to resonate with the bass accord or the bass consonances, or all three at the same time, in which we can imagine about ten or a hundred sounds that themselves are already complex, that resonate simultaneously in a kind of continuous world, the world of the composition and of the pre-established harmony. And this is how today we have a technical answer to the “great laws”, in quotes, that had…
Deleuze: Into the game… Yes, because I was telling you one day, understand, that God made the world by playing. It’s a very interesting idea that runs through all philosophy and that began very early on, but what’s important is to know what the kind of game is. The idea could mean, and it’s not the same idea as long as one hasn’t stated what kind of game it is. We saw this all too briefly because, there again, we are in a review of another study, that we would have to study very, very closely what Leibniz presents as the “game of God” when he created the world, and what little we did see, it was extremely complex, that it was a kind of game that wasn’t at all the same as Heraclitus’s game or Mallarmé’s game, and that it’s a very, very special type of game. [Deleuze looks up at RP’s drawing on the board] Here what is interesting is that the harmonizer’s game is a type of game. I don’t at all mean that’s it’s Leibniz’s, but that is of the same family, completely of the same family.
Listen, I would like to end like this. What I would like to tell you is two things. Next week, as I already told you, but I insist on this because otherwise there will be lots of you – so listen closely — that may have some problems. Next Tuesday I will be back, but only to see the students of first, second and third cycles concerning their personal work and any problems they have or things for me to sign. So I will be available to them Tuesday. So don’t forget this. On Tuesday, we will take care of all your problems for first, second and third cycle students. So, do this, come; otherwise, I said that you can call me if you have an urgent problem. It’s very important to sort out your administrative situation. So, we have a rendezvous next Tuesday around 10 am on this topic.
And then, the other thing is very simple. I find that this year, we have accomplished again a rich year, and I am saying, without undue flattery on your part, that this has been greatly thanks to you. And finally, I deeply thank those who intervened in our musical discussion. So, I really like that it has left us, as required, with some confused impressions. But I believe that, in any case for me, it gives me some new departure points for work that I would not have had without this session. So, there we are, thank you very much.
 
